[

LORD JUSTICE WILIMER: The Judgment which I am about to read is the Judgment of the Court, which deals with and resolves all the points which have been argued except one, and in relation to that one there is, unhappily, a disagreement between the members of the Court, and on that one point we will deliver separate Judgments when I have read the Judgment of the Court.

This is indeed a sorry story, and one which reflects no credit at all on any of the parties to it. When Miss Pauling, the plaintiffs' mother (and we shall refer to her throughout as "the mother") married their father (to whom we shall refer as "the Commander) she was a young lady of considerable fortune. She was marrying a naval officer who had almost no fortune at all, and by the wisdom, no doubt, of her parents, it was decided to vest her fortune in trustees of the trusts of a marriage settlement. The whole object of this transaction was to prevent the use (or rather misuse) of the lady's capital for the very purposes for which in fact it had been very largely frittered away, that is, in the ordinary living expenses of the family. Apart from a power to raise £10,000 out of the settlement (which had been exercised long before the history of this action starts) it was intended that the mother should have nothing more than the income during her life, and she was restrained from anticipating that.

In June of the year 1948 the trust funds were intact, and amounted to over £70,000. By June 1954 the Bank had raised and paid away over £29,000 from the capital of these funds in purported exercise of a power of advancement, and there was nothing whatever left to show for it. How had this melancholy event happened? It was in part due to a misunderstanding of a power of advancement contained in the settlement, which was in rather unusual form, and later on to its plain misuse, but also was largely due to the charm of manner and powers of persuasion of the Commander. The learned trial Judge has found the Bank liable to replace nearly £15,000 as having been expended in breach of trust for which they can be compelled to account. Both parties appeal.

The relevant transactions over this period of six years are many, and involve each of the four children of the marriage. Different questions arise in respect of most of these transactions, and accordingly we propose in this Judgment first to set out the basic facts, then to state our view of the legal questions that have been argued before us, and finally to deal seriatim with the facts of each advance and to apply the law accordingly.

The plaintiffs, the children of the Commander and the mother, are: (1) A son, Francis, born on the 15th October, 1920; (2) A son, George, born on the 11th October, 1925; (3) A daughter, Ann (now Mrs Broadbent) born on the 24th March, 1928; (4) A son, Anthony, born on the 15th June, 1930.

As already stated, the marriage settlement was of funds supplied entirely by the mother. The defendants, Coutts & Company (to whom we shall refer as ''the Bank") have all along been the sole trustees. Apart from the special power to raise £10,000 for the mother's use which we have already mentioned, the settlement followed the usual lines of such an instrument. The mother had the income of the trust fund for life without power of anticipation and after her death her husband was to have an annuity of £500 a year. Provision was also made for the mother to have power to appoint a life interest in half of the trust fund to any surviving husband. Subject thereto, the trust fund was to be held in trust for the children or remoter issue of the mother, whether by the intended or any future marriage, in such shares as the mother might appoint, and in default of appointment the children were to take in equal shares on attaining the age of twenty-one, or being female marrying under that age. Clause 11 of the settlement, under which the Bank purported to act in making the advances complained of, provided as follows: 

"It shall be lawful for the trustees at any time or times after the death of the wife or In her lifetime with her consent in writing to raise any part or parts not exceeding in the whole one-half of the then expectant or presumptive or vested share of any child or more remote issue of the wife in the said trust premises under the trusts hereinbefore contained and to pay the same to him or her for his or her own absolute use or to pay or apply the same for his or her advancement or otherwise for his or her benefit in such manner as the trustees shall think fit ...". 

By clause 14 power was conferred on the trustees during the life of the mother, and with her consent in writing, to lay out a sum not exceeding £10,000 in the purchase of a house as a residence for the wife, and in its decoration, repair or improvement, provided that such house was situated in England, Wales, Scotland or Ireland. Lastly, provision was made for the Bank to act as bankers in respect of the trust funds without being liable to account for profits, and to be remunerated for their services in accordance with their published scale of fees. Messrs Charles Russell & Co. were nominated as solicitors to the trust with permission to the Bank to consult its own solicitors in any case in which it should think fit. These were Messrs Parrer & Co,

It should at this stage be stated that at all material times the mother had an account with the Bank. The Commander did not have any separate bank account with the Bank, but he was authorised to draw on the mother's account, and it appears that it was he who largely controlled it. During most of the time with which we are concerned this account was substantially overdrawn.

In addition to the funds subject to the settlement, the mother also enjoyed a small life interest under the will of her deceased father. There were also certain shares standing in the joint names of the Commander and his mother. Apart from these small additional sources of income, the family were wholly dependent on the income derived from the marriage settlement. The evidence shows that the family were quite unable to adapt themselves to the changed conditions of life after the last war, and expected to continue on the scale of life suitable between the wars, with the result that the available income was always overspent so that the Commander was always hard up for money.

Now as to the questions of law involved in this appeal. First as to the true meaning and intent of the power in clause 11. This power has been accepted as containing two limbs, first a power with the consent of the mother in her lifetime to raise any part or parts not exceeding in the whole one-half of the expectant, presumptive or vested share of any child, and to pay the same to him or her for his or her absolute use, and, secondly, the more usual power to pay or apply the same for his or her advancement or otherwise for his or her benefit in such manner as the Bank might think fit. It was argued that the power contained in the first limb was wider than that in the second, although it was conceded on both sides that in both cases the power was fiduciary. 

Having regard to the very wide interpretation given to the statutory power (which approximates to the second limb in Pauling's Settlement) by their Lordships' House in re Pilkington (1962 volume 3 Weekly Law Reports, page 1051) we cannot see that the ambit of the first limb of the power substantially differs from that of the second limb. But, as all the advances were made in purported exercise of the first limb, we must examine the argument upon it. Being a fiduciary power, it seems to us quite clear that the power can be exercised only if it is for the benefit of the child or remoter issue to be advanced or, as was said during argument, it is thought to be "a good thing'' for the advanced person to have a share of capital before his or her due time. That this must be so, we think, follows from a consideration of the fact that the parties to a settlement intend the normal trusts to take effect, and that a power of advancement be exercised only if there is some good reason for it. That good reason must be beneficial to the person to be advanced it cannot be exercised capriciously or with some other benefit in view. The trustees, before exercising the power, have to weigh on the one side the benefit to the proposed advancee, and on the other hand the rights of those who are or may hereafter become interested under the trusts of the settlement. We reject Sir Milner Holland's argument on behalf of the Bank to the effect that an advancement can be made under the first limb which is not for the benefit of the advanced person. Furthermore, it is clear that the power under the first limb may be exercised, if the circumstances warrant it, either by making an out and out payment to the person to be advanced, or for a particular purpose specified by the trustees. Thus in argument an example was given that when George was called to the Bar, the trustees might have quite properly advanced to him a sum of capital quite generally for his living expenses to support him while starting to practice provided they thought that this was a reasonable thing to do, and that he was a type of person who could reasonably be trusted to make proper use of the money. On the other hand, if the trustees make the advance for a particular purpose which they state, they can quite properly pay it over to the advancee if they reasonably think they can trust him or her to carry out the prescribed purpose. What they cannot do is to prescribe a particular purpose, and then raise and pay the money over to the advancee leaving him or her entirely free, legally and morally, to apply it for that purpose or to spend it in any way he or she chooses, without any responsibility upon the trustees even to inquire as to its application.

Failure to appreciate this was one of the root causes of the trouble, for in the first opinion of counsel in 1948 (to which we shall refer later) he advised that the trustees could make an advancement out and out for the purpose of a purchase of a house in the Isle of Man, but he said this purchase "depends on a voluntary act by the children, and they should, I think, be separately advised on this point. So far as the trustees are concerned, they will be paying the money to the children for their own absolute use". This, we think, was the wrong approach. At that time both Francis and George were studying at university, and it was not suggested that they required any sum for their maintenance there; the only possible justification for advancing the very substantial sum of £5,000 to each of the two boys, one of them twenty-seven and the other just twenty-two, who had no other possible proper use for this money, was to invest it in a house in the Isle of Man as the settlement powers were insufficient, and the advancement could be justified only for that purpose. This error was perpetuated later by the childrens' solicitor, who got into the habit of advising them that, although purported advancements were, for example, for the repair of a house or for the purchase of furniture, they were sums which the children could "blue", for example, on a horse.

This was wrong and misleading advice. If money was advanced for an express purpose by the Bank, the advanced person was under a duty to carry that purpose out, and he could not properly apply it to another. We are not concerned with the question whether in such circumstances the Bank could recover money so misapplied, but this much is plain, that if such misapplication came to their notice, they could not safely make further advances for particular purposes without making sure that the money was in fact applied to that purpose, since the advancee would have shown him or herself quite irresponsible. It would be their duty to proceed on future occasions on behalf of the particular child under the second limb of the power.

The first question, therefore, that arises in relation to each of the advances, which we shall consider seriatim, is whether there was a proper exercise of the power under either limb. No question arises as to the consent of the mother, for that was given in every case. If the advance were proper in any particular case, the question of the children's consent, although adult, would not arise; for as has been made quite clear in re  Pilkington (supra) as there is no express provision in clause 11 requiring the adult beneficiaries' consent to the advance being made for his or her benefit, it would not be necessary to obtain that consent, though no doubt any trustee intending to advance an adult beneficiary would normally do so only with his consent, and probably only at his request. But, if any advance were an improper exercise of the power in clause 11 (and they all were in the learned Judge's view) what is the position? Prima facie, having improperly exercised the power, the Bank would be guilty of a breach of trust and must replace the money misapplied.

Now Mr Bagnall, for the plaintiffs, has made it clear that in this action each beneficiary is suing to recover only the advances purported to have been made to him or her, or for his or her benefit. This is not a case where any beneficiary is seeking to compel the trustees to replace trust funds wrongly applied, or paid away to some other beneficiary. Had that been the case, different considerations would, no doubt, have applied. But in the circumstances of this case it is clear to us that if the Bank can establish a valid request or consent by the advanced beneficiary to the advance in question, that is a good defence on the part of the Bank to the beneficiary's claim, even though it be plain that the advance was made in breach of trust. But (and this is really the second question) this consent or request, Mr Bagnall submitted, must be the spontaneous act of the child; and it has been alleged in the pleadings that in the circumstances of this case each of the children at the time of the respective advances to them must be presumed to have been under the undue influence of their parents as they had but recently attained full age; therefore, he says, their requests and consents cannot be relied upon by the Bank.

The doctrine of undue influence, much discussed before us, merely arises out of the fact that, while equity approves of gifts by a father to a child, and therefore invented the doctrine of presumption of advancement, so on the other hand it dislikes and distrusts gifts by a child to a parent, and therefore invented the presumption of undue influence. Both these presumptions merely mean, in our opinion, that in the absence of evidence, or if the evidence on each side be evenly balanced, in the first case equity will presume that the parent who puts property in a child's name intends to make a gift or give a benefit to the child, while on the other hand money or property passing from the child to the parent cannot be retained by the latter because it is assumed that so unnatural a transaction would have been brought about by undue use of the natural influence that a parent has over a child, and of the filial obedience which a child owes to his parent. Both presumptions may be rebutted; each is in truth a convenient device in aid of decisions on facts often lost in obscurity, whether owing to the lapse of time or the death of the parties.

Where the presumption of undue influence exists, a gift by a child cannot be retained by a parent unless he or she can show first that the gift was the spontaneous act of the child; secondly, that the child knew what his rights were; and thirdly it is desirable, though not essential, that a child should have independent, and if possible professional advice, before making a gift. "The court", said Lord Justice Cotton in A Hoard v. Skinner (1887 volume 36 Chancery Division, page 145, at page 171) "sets aside the voluntary gift, unless it is proved that in fact the gift was the spontaneous act of the donor acting under circumstances which enabled him to exercise an independent will and which justifies the court in holding that the gift was the result of a free exercise of the donor's will". The whole question is fully discussed in the leading case of Hugenin v. Baseley (volume 14 Vesey, page 273) and the notes to that case in White and Tudor, Eighth Edition, volume 1, at pages 259-302. The result is well stated by Mr Justice Parwell in Powell v. Powell (1900 volume 1 Chancery Division, at page 246): 

"A man of mature age and experience can make a gift to his father or mother because he stands free of all over-riding influence except such as may spring from what I may call filial piety; but a young person (male or female) just of age requires the intervention of an independent mind and will, acting on his or her behalf and interest solely, in order to put him or her on an equality with the maturer donor who is capable of taking care of himself".

The question of the duration of the presumption has also been much discussed. Lord Cranworth considered that it should be taken as a period of a year after the child attained twenty-one; see Smith v. Kay (volume 7 House of Lords Cases, page 750 at page 772) but this has not been received with approval. In our judgment the question is one of fact and degree. One begins with a strong presumption In the case of a child just twenty-one living at home, and this will grow less and loss as the child goes out in the world and leaves the shelter of his home. Nevertheless, the presumption normally lasts only a " short" time after the child has attained twenty-one; see Lancashire Loans Limited v. Black (1934 volume 1 King's Bench Division, page 380, per Lord Justice Greer at page 419) and it seems impossible and undesirable to define it further. A married daughter with a separate establishment of her own may be emancipated directly she attains twenty-one, whereas a spinster who has never left home might be able to rely on the presumption for a longer period. We reject, however, Mr Bagnall's submission that this presumption continues indefinitely until it is proved that the undue influence has ceased to exist. That is to confuse a case of actual undue influence with the presumption. On the other hand, it may be difficult for a spinster daughter living at home to prove a case of actual undue influence for many years after she has attained the age of twenty-one. In the present case it is important to remember that only the presumption is relied on; no actual undue influence is alleged.

Then Sir Milner argued that trustees who have obtained no benefit from payments induced by undue influence could not be hold liable, and that the only person who could be sued would be the parent presumed to have exercised the undue influence, or any person (short of a bona fide purchaser for value) who received the benefit of the payments. On the other hand, Mr Bagnall argued that the Bank were in the position of volunteers, and therefore could not escape the consequences of dealing in breach of trust with a beneficiary presumed to have been actuated by the undue influence of a third party; they wore at risk just as any other volunteer who takes the property acquired in breach of trust.

In the circumstances of this case, we do not think it necessary to express a concluded opinion upon this matter except to say that we reject Sir Milner Holland's argument that the Bank cannot be made liable unless they received some benefit from the breach of trust. It seems to us in principle that a trustee dealing in breach of trust with a beneficiary who has just attained the age of twenty-one years must realise the danger that such beneficiary may be acting under the influence of a parent. We do not see how a trustee can possibly escape the consequences of that knowledge. Some support for this view is to be found in King v. King (volume 1 De Gex & Jones's Reports, page 663) a case of a suspected fraud on a power.

Without expressing a final opinion, we think that the true view may be that a trustee carrying out a transaction in breach of trust may be liable if he know, or ought to have known, that the beneficiary was acting under the undue influence of another, or may be presumed to have done so, but will not be liable if it cannot be established that he so knew, or ought to have known.

That is sufficient for the purposes of the present case, for, of course, the Bank knew very exactly the ages of each of the children, and they knew further that as each child attained twenty-one, that child received advances from the Bank which went straight into the banking account of the mother. Indeed, in Ann's case plans were made to effect this unhappy result even before the child attained twenty-one. Accordingly, it seems to us clear that if it can be established that the presumption exists in any given case, the Bank are fixed with notice of it and cannot rely on any consents given under such influence.

The Bank also rely for relief from the consequences of any breach of trust upon section 61 of the Trustee Act 1925. At this stage all we propose to say is that it would be a misconstruction of the section to say that it does not apply to professional trustees, but, as was pointed out in the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in National Trustees Company of Australasia Limited v. General Finance Company of Australia Limited (1905 Appeal Cases, page 373 at page 381) "Without saying that the remedial provisions of the section should never be applied to a trustee in the position of the appellants, their Lordships think it is a circumstance to be taken into account". Where a banker undertakes to act as a paid trustee of a settlement created by a customer, and so deliberately places itself in a position where its duty as trustee conflicts  with its interest as a banker, we think that the court should be  very slow to relieve such a trustee under the provisions of the  section.

We propose to deal with the bank's plea of the Limitation  Act 1939 and the pleas of laches, acquiescence and delay when we  have considered the detailed transactions. It only remains to state  that the question of law upon which this case was reported in the  court below, re Pauling's Settlement Trusts (1962 volume 1 Weekly  Law Reports, page 86) has not been argued before us, and many of  the cases there cited have not been cited to us. Mr Bagnall,  however, accepts as accurate the proposition which is contained in  the paragraph in the middle of page 108 of the report. We express  no opinion on it.

We now deal with the impugned transactions seriatim. Up to 1947 the family lived in a large country house in Gloucestershire purchased with marriage settlement funds under the power contained in clause 14 already mentioned. When it became necessary, owing to financial stringency, to sell this house, the Commander conceived the idea of purchasing a house in the Isle of Man, one of his principal objects being to reduce his tax liability. It was then discovered that the purchase of a house in the Isle of Man was not authorised by the terms of the marriage settlement, and this led to the Commander taking advice from Messrs Charles Russell & Co., who in turn sought counsel's opinion. Counsel confirmed the view that there was no power under clause 14 of the settlement to purchase a house in the Isle of Man, but he advised that the desired object could possibly be achieved in a different way by invoking the power of advancement to the children of the marriage under clause 11.

By this time the two eldest children, Francis and George, were over twenty-one, and counsel advised that if they were agreeable advances could be made to them of sums sufficient to enable a house to be bought, which they could then settle voluntarily on their mother for life with remainder to themselves. Counsel emphasised, however, that this could be done only by a voluntary act on the part of the children, and he recommended that they should be separately advised. We have already criticised counsel's approach to clause 11. Francis and George proved to be agreeable to the course suggested, but both disclaimed any desire to be separately advised. Accordingly, on the 10th January 1948 the mother requested the Bank in writing to raise up to £10,000 from capital, and pay the same as might be directed by her two sons, Francis and George. Francis and George joined in signing a memorandum dated the 12th January 1948, the material part of which was in the following terms: 

"We, the undersigned, Francis George Younghusband and George Oswald Younghusband, hereby authorise and request you to apply such sums as may be made available for our advancement under Mrs Younghusband's request to you dated 10th January 1948 in purchasing a property in the Isle of Man, which it is our intention to settle in accordance with the suggestion contained in the opinion of counsel dated the 12th December 1947 in a settlement in which you are to be the trustees''. 

In due course the Commander found a house called "Oakhill Lodge" in the Isle of Man, which was duly purchased at auction on the 4th August 1948 for £8,450 and became the family home for the next seven years.

The Commander could not boar to see such a valuable asset as a house on which spending money could be raised disappearing into a settlement on the mother and her two children. At an early stage, long before the house was purchased, the Bank, on the Commander's instructions, had told Charles Russell & Co. that It was not intended to settle any of the money to be advanced; yet this change of plan, strangely enough, brought forth no protest, or even comment, from Bank or solicitors. But worse was to follow. On the 22nd October 1948 the Bank wore writing to Francis about completion of the purchase in the joint names of "you and your brother". Yet on the 26th October they wrote this to the Isle of Man solicitors acting for them in connection with the conveyances "Commander and Mrs Younghusband's marriage settlement. We are favoured with your letter of the 23rd of this month, reference ADK/MT, add in reply beg to say that Oakhill is being purchased with money being taken out of the above-mentioned trust and placed at the disposal of the two eldest sons of Commander and Mrs Younghusband for their advancement under the powers given to us by the settlement. You will appreciate, therefore, that the house will not have to be convoyed to us. It is on the instructions of the two sons that the remittance of £7,605 is to be made to you to enable you to complete the purchase, but Commander Younghusband has told us this morning that it is their wish that the conveyance should be in favour of himself and Mrs Younghusband" . Not one word of protest was raised by the Bank at this complete reversal of the scheme envisaged by counsel. They quite calmly applied the money raised for the benefit of the sons in the purchase of a house for the Commander and the mother. They never obtained the consent of the sons to this, and the evidence was that the sons never did consent.

The subsequent history of the house was that shortly afterwards it was mortgaged by the Commander for £5,000, which sum, was apparently spent as income. When financial disaster overtook the Commander in 1955 (as a result of which he was made bankrupt in the Isle of Man) the house was sold for loss than the amount of the mortgage, so that in the event Francis and George lost the whole of their £8,450.

Making all due allowance for the fact that the Bank may have misunderstood the effect of clause 11, it does not explain their complete laxity in permitting this transaction to go forward. Even at this early stage they wholly failed to exercise any powers or duties as trustees, and thought only of themselves as bankers to the Commander and the mother. We doubt whether the original advance, if counsel's advice had been carried out, would have been a proper exercise of the power, but no harm could come of it for the new settlement would replace the old, and the position would be safeguarded. But having regard to the way in which the transaction was in fact carried out, they have no defence to the claim to replace this sum, and it is not surprising that the contrary was hardly argued. Any relief under section 61 is out of the question.

This sorry tale of the house does not even end there. On the same day on which the deposit was paid is found the first payment made direct into the mother's account, then heavily overdrawn. This was a sum of £1,000. The payment arose out of advice given on the 10th June 1948 by the Bank's solicitors to the effect that it would be proper, in addition to advancing money on the house (upon the footing, of course, that it would be settled on the sons) to advance a sum for the purpose of furnishing it. The first mention of amount emanated from the Commander, who fixed it arbitrarily at £1,000, a sum to which he obtained his sons' assent on the 18th August. The trustees accepted this without inquiry, no doubt upon the footing that the house would be conveyed to the sons and their consent was given only on that footing. That assumption was still valid on the 13th September 1948 when the sum was credited to the mother's account. The learned Judge found that, this being so, there had been a valid consent, and the Bank was excused.

We do not accept this. This payment was bound up with the question of the house itself. Once the Bank realised there was to be no settlement, it was the duty of the Bank to reconsider the whole project. Then, when the Bank realised that the house was not going to belong to the boys, but to their parents, the impropriety of purchasing furniture with the boys' money became obvious. Yet they took no steps to remedy the situation. The Bank never even took any steps to see whether any furniture was in fact purchased, and none (or almost none) in fact was. All that happened was that the mother's overdraft was reduced by £1,000, The Bank was in a delicate position. Their interest as bankers conflicted with their duties as trustees, as they had indeed shown themselves well aware in their letter earlier in the same year. The Bank acted in plain breach of their duty most unreasonably, and no question of relief under section 61 of the Trustee Act 1925 can arise. The appeal is allowed so far as this advance is concerned.

Long before the purchase of the house was completed the Commander (inspired apparently by the reasoning of counsel's opinion)  conceived the idea that the powers of advancement conferred by  clause 11 of the settlement could be used for the purpose of raising  further sums up to one-half of each child's presumptive share in the  capital of the trust fund, which sums could then be used for paying  off Mrs Younghusband's overdraft, and for living expenses. It was  calculated that each child's presumptive share, allowing for a  reserve to meet death duties in the event of Mrs Younghusband dying  within five years, would be about £14,000. The Commander therefore  embarked upon a plan for raising approximately £7,000 to be advanced  nominally to each child on attaining the age of twenty-one.  With this object in view, the Commander early in 1948  suggested to the Bank that further sums be advanced to Francis and  George up to a total of approximately £14,000 with the objects of  paying off (a) a loan of £2,600 which the Bank, as trustees of  another settlement (by a Mrs Hodson) had advanced to the mother,  and (b) the overdraft on the mother's account, which then stood at  about £3,000. The Hodson loan was secured by the mother's life  interest under her father's will and by four policies on her life to  a total value of £3,000, the surrender value of which was then about  £650.

The Commander's first letter on the subject is characteristic and discloses the whole schemes "(2) W.R.T. yr. RSC27 of 21/1 for which many thanks. Would you be kind enough, in that case, to get a memo, signed by our two sons along the lines of the proposed draft attached herewith? Otherwise, as I pointed out in my 17/1, a house we may want to buy might well get sold before we could pay a deposit. We would, of course, get legal advice here before signing a contract. To satisfy a vendor that we were entitled to sign one, I suppose we would need a statement from you that the £10,000 was available? (3) As this money can be advanced to our sons unconditionally (which I hadn't realised) wouldn't it be advantageous for all concerned to advance them the full amount possible (£7,000 each, I think you said in a previous letter) and use the balance not needed for the house to pay off first the Hodson loan of (I think) £3,000, and second, as much as possible of our overdraft of £3,000 ?

From investments yielding about 3 per cent we are now paying 5 per cent on the loans plus, in the first case, 3 per cent life insurance, (4) If you agree, would you please send memos, to effect this to my wife and sons for their signatures ? If you cannot do so without further legal advice, it might be as well to await our arrival before asking for it so that we can make sure that we narrow the question as much as possible to avoid unnecessary charges".

This letter led to another lamentable and indeed inexplicable transaction. The Bank did not at first view these suggestions with much sympathy, and expressed doubt as to whether this would be a proper exercise of their power under clause 11 of the settlement. They took advice from Messrs Charles Russell & Co., whose advice was no more encouraging. The Commander, however, was importunate and apparently very persuasive. He dropped for the time being the suggestion of making advances to Francis and George to enable them to pay off the mother's overdraft, but he continued to press his suggestion for raising money to pay off the Hodson loan.

In due course Messrs Charles Russell & Co. advised that, subject to the Bank being prepared to exercise their discretion, this might be a proper exercise of the power conferred by clause 11 provided that Francis and George received an adequate quid pro quo. What was envisaged was (a) that the four life policies should be assigned absolutely to Francis and George; (b) that the mother should execute a covenant to maintain the premiums on the policies; and (c) that the mother should also execute a covenant to pay a fair rate of interest on the money advanced. This would result in Francis and George receiving £3,000 on the death of the mother in return for the £2,600 advanced, as well as having an immediately income from the payment of the interest. Messrs Charles Russell & Co. further recommended that Francis and George should be separately advised.

In pursuance of this, Mr Burrell of Messrs Farrer & Co. was instructed on their behalf. He interviewed Francis and George, explained the suggested arrangement to them, and satisfied himself that they wished it to be carried out. He advised, however, that in addition to the other requirements, the mother should execute a codicil to her will giving a legacy to Francis and George of such an amount as would cover the death duties payable on the policies in the event of her dying within five years.

The scheme as advised by Charles Russell & Co. might at a pinch be justified as an exercise of the power under clause 11, though we cannot understand how a charge on the mother's life interest under her other settlement was omitted, but as carried out the transaction was disastrously different.

The necessary assignment was drafted by Messrs Charles Russell & Co. and was in due course executed by the mother, who also made a codicil to her will. Whether or not due to an oversight, the assignment as drafted and executed contained no express covenant on the part of the mother either to maintain the premiums on the policies or to pay any interest to Francis and George on the amount advanced. Mr Burrell, however, approved the draft on behalf of the boys without ever consulting them. Accordingly, in due course, at the request of the mother, and with the consent of Francl3 and George, a sum of £2,600 was raised and paid over to the mother, who applied it for paying off the Hodson loan. It is important to observe that although legal advice was taken in connection with this transaction, and although Francis and George were separately advised, the transaction as actually carried out differed materially and to the disadvantage of Francis and George from that which had been advised and explained to them. All the sons got in return for the expenditure of £2,600 extracted from their expectancies and paid to the Bank in release of their mother's debt were policies with a surrender value of £650, and probably an implied covenant to keep up payment of the premiums.

The payment of this sum was a clear breach of trust. In this case the sons did have separate advice, but what they approved was the proposed, not the actual, transaction, of which latter they never knew, and to which they never consented. How their solicitor came to approve the assignment, we cannot understand. He completely failed in his duty to his clients. The boys never saw it, and though expressed to be parties, never executed it; this was, no doubt, unnecessary. Yet Mr Burrell wrote this letter to the Bank; 

"Dear Sirs, Commander and Mrs Younghusband's marriage settlement. We enclose a copy of the letter which Mr Fletcher, of Messrs Charles Russell & Co., has written to Mr Burrell. We have now satisfied ourselves that, so far as the sons are concerned, this matter is in a satisfactory state, and therefore we should be obliged if you would complete it with Mr Fletcher when he makes an appointment to do so. We are, dear sirs, Yours faithfully, Farrer & Co." 

A less satisfactory state could hardly be imagined.

Charles Russell & Co. equally failed in their duty to the Bank to see that the transaction was carried out in accordance with the advice they had given. As carried out, the transaction plainly could not be justified as an exercise of the power under clause 11, and, of course, the Bank cannot hide behind the negligence of their own advisers for whose neglect they must, as between them and their beneficiaries, assume full responsibility.

The payment being, therefore, a plain breach of trust, the fact that the boys were badly advised is no defence for the Bank. The Bank must show that the boys consented to the breach of trust; this on the evidence they cannot do.

The members of the court differ, however, upon the question whether the Bank should be relieved under section 61 of the Trustee Act, and if so to what extent. On this point alone, therefore, separate Judgments will be delivered.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN. Later in 1948 the Commander returned to the suggestion of raising another £2,000 so as to bring the total advanced to Francis and George up to approximately £14,000. The Bank was not at first prepared to make this further advance, and in this it was supported by the advice of Messrs Charles Russell & Go. The Commander, however, continued to press his request, and alleged that the money was needed to pay for improvements to the recently purchased house in the Isle of Man. At the request of the Bank, he promised to submit accounts in respect of the improvements, showing what had been or had to be paid, but in fact this was never done. Eventually, at an interview which took place in April 1949, when the Commander was on a visit to London, he prevailed upon the Bank to let him have a form for Francis and George to sign, or at least instructions as to what they should say in order to justify the proposed advance of £2,000. He is recorded as having informed the Bank that Francis and George would sign whatever was necessary. This remark is highly relevant to the question (which we shall consider later) as to the extent to which Francis and George at this date could be said to be emancipated from parental influence. The upshot was that on or about the 29th April 1949 Francis and George signed a document drafted by the Bank in the following terms with reference to the further sum of not exceeding £2,000 which you are raising in accordance with the terms of the above-mentioned settlement for payment to us in equal shares by way of advancement, we hereby authorise and request you to place the money when raised to the account in your hooks of Mrs R, Violet Younghusband. We fully appreciate that the money in question has been or is being used for the purpose of making improvements to the property in the Isle of Man "belonging to Mrs Younghusband", As a result, £2,000 was raised and on the 13th May 1949 paid into the mother's account. It will be seen that in this case there was no pretence that the money raised was being used for the benefit of Francis and George.

Furthermore, it will be observed that this was not a request "by the sons to make an advance, but a consent to a transaction already decided upon by the Bank. The document emanates from the Bank and was forwarded to the father by them with a view to him procuring the signatures. Its object was to protect the Bank against what we cannot help thinking they knew very well to be a breach of trust. The sons had no separate advice. Nevertheless, they were of age, and competent to make their parents a present if they really wished, and the only question is whether the document we have just read was procured by the presumed undue influence of the father. We have already discussed the law on this matter, and the real question is whether on the facts the presumption applies to this case. If it does, the Bank has made no attempt to rebut it.

It seems to us that the whole picture must be looked at, and it is from the documents that a fairly clear view can be had. It does not appear that the mother, the source of the money, was more than a cypher willing to sign whatever her husband put before her. He controlled the family fortune by his right to draw on the family banking account, and he assumed throughout that what he says will go. As we have already said, he was the originator of all the transactions complained of here. His method was to cajole the Bank into going as far as they thought they dared, and then to prepare what he called "chits" (or sometimes got them prepared by the Bank) and send them to his wife or the child or children concerned for signature. So far this looks like a typical case where undue influence ought to be presumed, but the Judge, who saw the witnesses, was chary of acting upon the presumption. The impression he got was of a united family determined to extract from the Bank by hook or by crook the money necessary to continue its extravagant way of life. On this view of it, the passage we have quoted about the sons being willing to sign anything bears a less sinister aspect.

At the time of this advance the son George was twenty-three years old. He had done his military service, and was up at Cambridge. The Judge thought him an exceptionally able young man, well acquainted with his rights, and able to take care of himself. He had no separate advice about this £2,000 advance, but he had been advised about the Hodson loan transaction, and in the course of receiving the explanations then offered he must have realised what the power was which the trustees were purporting to exercise. Indeed, the fatal opinion of counsel advising on the possibility of using clause 11 to purchase a house in the Isle of Man was, on the evidence, familiar not only to George, but to Ann. The Judge held that he was emancipated from parental control, and well enough acquainted with his position to make his consent to this advance binding upon him, and this court cannot reverse that finding, depending, as it does, so much upon the demeanour of the witness.

The case of the other son, Francis, is quite different. He was at this time twenty-eight years old, and was apparently living for the most part with his grandmother, so that he was removed from immediate parental control. On the other hand, we now know that he was a schizophrenic. This diagnosis had been made in 1940 when he found one day of life in the Air Force altogether too much for him, and was repeated by a doctor who saw him in 1951. He was not called by either side, it being agreed that his memory was not at all to be trusted. Consent to this, as to other transactions in which he was involved, was written out and sent to him by his father. There is no letter from him anywhere in the correspondence. No representative of the Bank ever saw him. He was obviously left purposely in the background.

On the other hand, he was capable of teaching in a boys' school, which he did for two years towards the end of the war, and was accepted for entry to Edinburgh University after the war, where also he continued for two years as a student. Further, when he went with his brother to be advised over the Hodson loans the partner in Farrer & Co. who saw him thought him capable of understanding the transaction. Moreover, it has never been alleged that he was at any material time incapacitated from contracting or conducting business affairs by reason of his mental health, though we cannot think that if the Bank had known of his history of ill health, they would have acted on the consents he returned signed to his father. But the Bank did not know the facts. We have considered anxiously whether, before making an advance, they should have made some inquiry into his circumstances. It Is alleged in the particulars of the statement of claim (paragraph 10) that the law presumes undue influence to exist between a person suffering from mental Ill-health and the person with whom he resides but in the end Mr Bagnall rightly abandoned this plea, for there is no such presumption though actual undue influence may not be difficult to prove. The presumption exists only as to the medical adviser. On the whole, we do not feel able to say that the presumption of undue influence must be held to exist between Francis and his parents having regard to his age and his absence from home, and we conclude that the Bank were not bound to make inquiries as to his state of mind or fitness as an object of the power they were affecting to exercise.

Accordingly, though this was the plainest breach of trust, we agree with the learned Judge that the Bank have a good defence, for they obtained consents from the two children concerned, and they were emancipated.

The completion of this transaction exhausted the amount which could be raised for the purpose of advancement to Francis and George. The next victim on the list was the daughter Ann. Even before she attained twenty-one in March 1949, her father was looking about for ways of spending her money, and broaching the subject to the Bank. He very soon seems to have concluded that, having acquired a country residence at the expense of his sons, it would now be a good plan to get a town house at the expense of his daughter. It is indeed fortunate for her that the proposed house, which was in Chelsea, was put into her name, probably to preserve the fiction that the parents were living in the Isle of Man.

The Commander's campaign began in February of 1949, and the proposal for a Chelsea house which he found first emerged on the 14th March, his daughter being still an infant. The trustees had taken the advice of their solicitors as to their power of advancement, and had received the Delphic advice that it was not "qualified in any way". The solicitors added that the young lady should be separately advised. The Bank seems to have accepted without any qualms the Commander's proposal that the daughter's money should be used to buy the Chelsea house of his choice as a residence for the family. Why the Bank should entertain this proposal passes our comprehension. The girl was in her first year at Oxford, and there was no reason at all why her expectant share should be spent in buying a house and furnishing it for her family's use. A family in these comparatively straightened circumstances had no justification for having two houses. This project, in our judgment, was clearly an improper use of the power made in order to suit the father, and without any proper regard to the benefit of the daughter. Having regard to her age, it is clear that the presumption of undue influence applies to this transaction. She, however, was anxious to embark on this speculation. The house apparently was in a semi-ruinous condition, and was not a purchase on which trustees could properly have laid out trust money. They had power to buy a house out of capital, but this expedient was never even considered, again for fiscal reasons.

As we have said, Ann was luckier than her brothers, for the purchase was to be in her name, and she received separate advice by a solicitor who saw to it that the conveyance to her was properly concluded. A member of his firm also gave her excellent advice against the transaction which she chose to ignore. As a result, sums amounting in the whole to £4,789 were applied in the purchase and repair and decoration of this house. Luckily for the Bank, property in Chelsea of whatever sort has appreciated very much in value. When Ann married in the year 1952 the house became in truth hers, and she has since disposed of it to advantage and recognises that, having had the money once, she cannot claim it again.

This sum, however, did not exhaust her expectant share of £7,000, and under her father's influence a further sum of £3,260 was advanced to the father or the mother nominally for the further improvement and furnishing of the Chelsea house, but in fact spent on the Isle of Man house, or used to support her mother's overdraft. This sum Ann claims from the Bank in the action.

It is not at all easy to follow the sequence of events on this point. It seems plain enough that the Bank, after refusing to entertain the purchase of the Chelsea house, were talked into it by the Commander. In March they informed the father and Ann that they would not entertain the matter, but in the same month (and in spite of advice from their own solicitors against it) they changed their mind and agreed to pay for the price of the house and up to £1,000 for repairs. The first mention of furniture, apart from decorations, comes in a memorandum of the 21st March of an interview with the Commander which shows that he asked for an additional £1,000 to cover furniture. It does not appear when this was assented to, but apparently it was, for in September a sum of £660 was credited to Ann against money she paid to her father pretendedly for the purchase of furniture. In November a sum of £400 was credited to her mother for the same purpose, in the 14th January 1950 another £400, and in March £600 more. In May a further £200 was paid to the mother's account, and finally £1,000 on the 21st August. In the intervals between these payments the Bank made a few ineffectual protests and asked to see bills, but never insisted, and it is evident that they exercised no discretion at all as to the amount needed for furniture first stated to be £1,000, and gradually increased to reach £3,260.

There is no doubt that Ann asked for each of these sums to be advanced, and it is clear that on each such occasion that Ann requested these advances she did so in writing, and represented that they were required for furniture etc., well knowing in fact that only about £500 was expended on the purchase of furniture from start to finish. The rest went in the family living expenses through the mother's account. Of course, Ann appreciated that these representations were untrue; "silly lies", as she said in the witness-box. The Judge refused to give relief to Ann in these respects. He carefully set out the details of the payments. We think it is to be inferred that he did not believe that Ann was so innocent as she pretended in the witness-box, saying that she always regarded the money as her mother's. Nevertheless, the Judge was clearly of opinion that a presumption of undue influence applied in Ann's case because he stated it was essential that she should have independent advice upon the transaction. Independent advice she did have on the purchase of the house, but none upon the expenditure on furniture, which was quite a separate matter, and this the Judge overlooked. The Judge says that the Bank acted on the faith of untrue statements by Ann, and refused Ann relief on this ground. We cannot agree with this. If the Judge meant no more than that the Bank required some document signed by Ann stating that the money was required for furniture, we agree with him, but we do not think that the Bank can have really acted on a sincere belief in the truth of the representations; their supine conduct shows that they really could have no more than a pious hope which they did not dare to test by pressing to see receipts for the purchase of this vast quantity of furniture, that most of it was being invested in furniture. A moment's study of the mother's account at this time would have shown that even this was improbable. They merely wanted some document which, as they thought, would give legal justification for making the payments.

Further, it seems to us that these very untrue statements must be treated as issuing out of the presumed undue influence of her father made, as they were, either to the Bank in his presence, or by arrangement with him. Finally, we do not consider that these statements, if true, would, as the Judge held, have justified the advances, though furniture bought and taken by Ann and retained by her might have afforded some defence to the breach of trust. The Bank at this stage ought to have had their eyes wide open to the situation and insisted on calling a halt to this reckless expenditure apparently for furniture.

Ann by her counsel concedes that she must give credit for £300 of furniture actually purchased. Subject to that, we feel constrained to come to the conclusion that, without separate advice, the Bank cannot rely on the assent of this young girl to gifts direct into her mother's and father's pockets, and we hold the Bank liable in respect of advances numbered 8, 12, 17, 18, half of 20 and 22 as set out in the statement of claim, and pro tanto allow the appeal accordingly. Having behaved unreasonably, the Bank cannot rely on section 61.

Ann's portion had now been fully used, but there remained one chicken to be plucked, a younger brother, Anthony, then a young man serving with The Blues in Germany. He attained twenty-one on the 15th June 1951, and three days after that event there is recorded an interview with the father, the terms of which are too important to omit. 

"Date 18th June 1951. Interview with Commander Younghusband. They want £2,000 to be raised for the youngest son. Mr Burrell is to write to the boy explaining that the money will be his to do as he likes with, and when that has been done and we receive Mrs Younghusband's formal request we are to raise the money and get the boy's directions for its disposal".

As the Judge said, the process had become streamlined. So long as Mr Burrell could write a letter telling the boy the money was his, all else would be automatic. This is exactly what happened. Mr Burrell wrote a most perfunctory letter to the young man in Germany which he agreed in the witness-box could not constitute proper separate advice, and in fairness to him was not intended to be more than a pipe opener to a lawyer's relationship with a potential client, and between the 11th July 1951 and the 7th February 1952 £6,500 was paid straight into the mother's account. There is one payment which is characteristic. The father had succeeded to the tune of £1,000 in raising the wind by a charge on Ann's house, and half the first payment to Anthony was used to repay the Bank this amount, thus robbing Anthony to pay Ann. There was not even a pretence in any instance of any countervailing benefit to Anthony except as mentioned later. We do not feel any doubt that the Bank is liable on these payments, as the Judge held. Relief under section 61 is out of the question.

The story does not end there. In 1953 and 1954 the Bank revalued the assets in the trust. Accordingly, when the father in June 1952 "called to inquire whether he could borrow a few hundred pounds", the Bank (whose words these are) after looking into the figures, without any inquiry whatever as to the purpose except that the father was in what he called "an awful hole", cheerfully agreed to advance to him a further £1,200, and suggested that it should be taken out of the shares of Francis, George and Ann in shares designed to make their advances equal. Fortunately for him, Anthony escaped this raid. Between September 1953 and June 1954 the advances specified in the statement of claim under numbers 28 to 35 inclusive were made direct to the father or mother; they aggregated the grand total of £5,350. Nobody pretends that these were not breaches of trust, but they were assented to by each of the three children. We have already concluded that Francis and George must be taken to be emancipated by this time, and so, we hold, was Ann. She had been married in 1952 and was living in her Chelsea house with her husband. In these circumstances, the learned Judge rightly held that these sums were not recoverable. The Bank refused to make any further advances, not because of the slightest doubts as to the grave impropriety of their conduct over the last six years, but because they thought that if they parted with anything more, they might not be protected against a possible claim for estate duty if the mother should die within five years of any particular advance.

The Bank pleads the Limitation Act 1939, and as to this we wholly agree with what the learned Judge said and need not repeat it. So too as to the defence of laches. As to acquiescence, we think that this must be looked at rather broadly. We were, of course, pressed with the leading case of Allcard v. Skinner (volume 36 Chancery Division, page 1415), but in that case the plaintiff had had her rights fully explained to her by a brother, who was a barrister, and by her solicitor, and yet she took no steps until five or six years later. Even that gave rise to a difference of opinion in a very strong Court of Appeal.

In this case it would be wrong, we feel, to place any disability upon the beneficiaries because it so happened that George was a member of the Bar, and had been in well-known chambers. He had not been in Chancery chambers where it may be said that these things are better understood? but the real truth of the matter is that a party cannot be held to have acquiesced unless he knew, or ought to have known, what his rights were. On the facts of this case we cannot criticise any of the plaintiffs for failing to appreciate their rights until another learned junior, whom they consulted on a far fetched and futile scheme of George's for avoiding estate duty on his mother's death, advised that the advances might be improper. That was in the year 1954, and thereupon the family, headed, of course, by George, took immediate steps to explore this matter. This is a most complicated action, and many matters had to be explored before an action for breach of trust could properly be mounted. The writ was issued in 1958, and we do not think it right to hold that the plaintiffs were debarred by acquiescence from bringing an action which otherwise, to the extent we have indicated, is justified.

We have already dealt with the impact of section 61 in general and in detail as we have gone through the various impugned transactions, and on that we need say nothing further. That leaves only one matter for our consideration, for the learned Judge held that in regard to Anthony he ought to direct an account whereby Anthony would have to give credit for certain payments which he received from his mother's account. Anthony had an account with the Bank, and through the kindness of his parents received the benefit of an arrangement made long before the payments in question whereby, whenever he was overdrawn, his account should be replenished up to £40. If he overdrew to a greater extent than that, he did not receive this benefit but he was wise enough, as we look at his account, never to do so. Furthermore, he had received for some time a trivial allowance, for an officer in The Blues, of £25 a quarter from his parents. It was argued (and the learned Judge agreed in principle) that as his account wa3 being replenished in these ways from his parent's account, he should, instead of being able to claim that the whole amount of £6,500 should be replaced to the trust, bring into account the amount of money which had been transferred to his own personal account. The question is whether the learned Judge was right in accepting that view.

Acting on two authorities, Raby v. Ridehalgh (volume 7, De Gex, Macnaghten & Gordon's Reports, page 104) and Chillingworth v. Chambers (1896 volume 1 Chancery Division, page 685), he apparently discerned some principle which he thought entitled him to direct an inquiry whereby Anthony would have to account for the sums which he had received through his mother's account in this way. Before us counsel for the defendants rightly did not attempt to argue that those two cases supported the Judge's view of the law. We do not doubt that if in fact money were paid by direction of the son to his mother's account, or (and it matters not, as we think) to the son's account, and then overnight to the mother's account, upon an understanding that some part of it was to be used to discharge the son's indebtedness to others, he must accept the position that the part so used must be treated as a payment to him. However, the facts fall far short of that in this case, and it was never sought to justify these payments upon any such ground. All that was argued was that as the son had in fact received, albeit indirectly, the benefit of certain of these payments, he should to that extent account for them.

This seems to us not to present any equitable principle of defence in the mouth of a defaulting trustee. In order to escape, the Bank would really have to establish that payment to the mother's account was pro tanto a payment to Anthony. The truth of the matter is that Anthony, under the presumed undue influence of the Commander, was paying very large sums to his mother's account which went to the general family living expenses, some of which he, in a general way, enjoyed as a member of the family, and some of which he enjoyed in a more particular way because it founds its way into his account under arrangements which had nothing to do with the advances. We cannot see how that circumstance entitles a defaulting trustee to any account even if, which we doubt, it would be possible to frame any inquiry which it would be possible to answer.

On this point we allow the appeal and discharge the order for an account.

We summarise our conclusions on the whole matter thus:

(1) As to the claim in respect of the money expended on the purchase of the house in the Isle of Man we agree with the learned Judge, and we dismiss the cross-appeal on this.

(2) As to the sum of £1,000 purported to be expended upon furniture for that house, we disagree with the learned Judge, and we allow the appeal to that extent. This sum must be replaced by the Bank.

(3) As to the £2,600 loan to repay the Hodson settlement, we allow the appeal to this extent, that that sum must be replaced by the Bank but the majority of the court feels that section 61 of the Trustee Act 1925 should relieve the Bank, but only to the extent of the surrender value in 1948 of the policies transferred to Francis and George.

(4) With regard to the £2,000 raised for the alleged purpose of purchasing furniture in the Isle of Man, we agree with the learned Judge and dismiss the appeal.

(5) As to Ann, we think that, notwithstanding her disregard of the truth, the Bank must replace the advances of £3,260 made to her, subject to giving credit for the sum of £300 which was in fact actually expended upon furniture. The appeal is allowed

pro tanto.

(6) We agree with the learned Judge that the Bank must replace the sum of £6,500 advanced to Anthony, but we disagree with the learned Judge that he should have to account for any sums received by her through his mother's account, and we allow the appeal accordingly and dismiss the cross-appeal.

(7) As to the final series of advances aggregating £5,350, we agree with the learned Judge and dismiss the appeal.

The appeal will be restored to the list for argument as to the exact form of order and as to costs on a mutually convenient day when counsel have had an opportunity of considering this Judgment in detail.

LORD JUSTICE WILLMER: The Judgment I am now about to read is my own Judgment on the outstanding point.

I have the misfortune to differ from my brethren as to the degree of relief which ought to be accorded to the Bank under section 61 of the Trustee Act 1925 in respect of their breach of trust regarding what has been described as the Hodson loan transaction. All of us are agreed that in the very special circumstances of this case the Bank should be accorded some relief notwithstanding the fact that they were professional trustees paid for their services. But whereas my brethren think that the Bank should be relieved only in part, I take the view that if relief is to be accorded at all, it should be accorded in full.

I can see no logical reason for stopping short of relief in full. The special circumstance which, in the view of all of us, entitles the Bank to relief is the fact that the solicitor specially appointed by the Bank to give separate advice to, and protect the interests of, Francis and George, failed to ensure that the transaction was carried out in the way which had been advised by Messrs Charles Russell & Co. and agreed to by the boys themselves. The Bank, though clearly in breach of trust, were quite innocent in the matter. They were not the cause of any part of the loss which resulted. Accordingly if, as I think, they are entitled to relief under section 61, they should, in my view, be relieved in full.

I venture to criticise the order proposed by my brethren in relation to this transaction on the ground that, although purporting to grant relief under section 61, it does not in fact result in any relief at all. For even without section 61, I do not see how the Bank could have been made liable for more than the amount of the loss actually sustained through the transaction being carried out as it was. Francis and George in fact received the life policies, the surrender value of which was said to be £650 in 1948. They retained the policies until 1953, by which time they had no doubt increased considerably in value since the payment of premiums was in fact maintained by the mother. The boys then quite voluntarily gave the policies back to their mother, apparently for the purpose of enabling the Commander to raise more money by charging them again. In so far as the boys gave away a tangible asset of value, their loss was due to their own voluntary act, and not to the Bank's original broach of trust. Quite apart from section 61, therefore, I should have thought that in any case the Bank could not have been made liable for the whole of the £2,600, but that credit ought to be given for the surrender value of the policies in 1953.

On the same principle, it has been rightly conceded on behalf of Ann that, in so far as she has herself retained the moneys advanced to her, she cannot claim to recover them again.

If, therefore, as we all agree, relief under section 61 should be accorded, this should, in my view, result in giving the Bank some relief beyond that to which they would in any event have been entitled. For my part, I would relieve the Bank entirely in respect of this £2,600.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN: Lord justice Harman is not able to be here this morning, and asks me to say that he concurs in the Judgment which I am about to deliver.

This Judgment deals only with the question of the liability of the Bank in relation to the Hodson trust.

Lord Justice Willmer has expressed the view that, apart altogether from any relief under section 61 of the Trustee Act 1925, the Bank could not be made liable for more than the amount of the loss actually sustained through the transaction being carried out as it was; and as Francis and George received the life policies, he has held that they must give credit for at least the surrender value of the policies at the date of the transaction. I regret that I am unable to share this view.

The transaction as carried out was a complete breach of trust, and entirely unauthorised by clause 11. Therefore the Bank must replace to the trust funds the £2,600 misapplied.

Test it in this way. Suppose that Francis and George had still the policies, could the Bank, on being ordered to replace £2,600 to the trust, claim that they were only bound to do so on having replaced to them the policies, or at any rate at least upon  receiving credit for the 1948 surrender value of the policies ?  It is, in my judgment, not the law that the plaintiff, rightly  suing for breach of trust, must account for every benefit he may  have incidentally received. What right have the Bank to claim some  set-off from the plain consequences of their breach of trust ?  I can see no possible equity which entitles the Bank to do so. In  fairness to the Bank, let it be said that their counsel never argued  that they had any right (apart from section 61} to claim any such  credit.

On the other hand, of course, as the Judgment of the court  has pointed out, it cannot be doubted that a beneficiary who has  consented to a transaction in breach of trust must be prepared to  accept the consequences and give credit for the money or property  that he has received. That principle, in my judgment, cannot be  applied to the case of the Hodson trust for the very simple reason  that, as the Judgment of the court has declared, Francis and George  never consented to the transaction as it was in fact carried out,  and indeed they were wholly ignorant of it. Therefore, the principle  that they must accept the consequences of a breach of trust to which  they have consented has no application at all, in my judgment, to  these circumstances. The boys received the policies, as they  thought, as part of a larger transaction which would give them  security and a profit on their mother's death. Through the failure  of the legal advisers of the boys and of the Bank, this transaction  was not carried out at all, and it gave them nothing except the  policies. For my part, in those circumstances, I entirely fail to  understand why Francis and George have to give credit for any  property which has passed to them under a transaction of which they  never knew, and never gave their consent. In law the Bank made them a present of the policies.

Lord Justice Willmer has drawn a parallel between this  transaction and the transaction in which Ann conceded that she must  give credit for the moneys advanced to her of which she retained the  benefit. With all respect, I do not follow this. Ann conceded  rightly that she must give credit for the moneys in fact applied for  her benefit for the reason that, as she requested money to be  applied in the purchase of a house and decorations etc., she must  account for the moneys so applied in accordance with her request.  That was in accordance with the general principle I have just stated,  that he or she who has consented to a transaction in breach of  trust must give credit for the benefit he or she has received.  There is no parallel in the Hodson settlement where there was no  such consent, nor any application of money at the boys' request as  the transaction turned out.

Accordingly, for my part I am quite unable to accept the  view that Lord Justice Willmer has expressed that, apart altogether  from section 61, Francis and George would have to account in some  measure for the policies which were in fact transferred into their  names.  In my judgment, therefore, the only question that arises is  whether the Bank should be relieved from the consequences of their  breach of trust under section 61 of the Trustee Act to any, and if  so, what extent. This, I think, is a very difficult question.  The Judgment of the court has already pointed out that the Bank were  personally innocent, but they were ill-advised by their own solicitors;  but the Bank must accept responsibility for such negligence, and  section 61 cannot possibly be invoked to relieve them from its consequences without more. The circumstance that seems to me to make  the application of the section possible is that the Bank received  the letter quoted in the Judgment of the court written by Mr Burrell  on behalf of Francis and George saying that the matter was in a  satisfactory state. Thereafter it would have been quite unreasonable  for the Bank to take any further step to assure themselves that the  transaction had been properly carried out, and they were lulled into a false sense of security. Section 61 is purely discretionary, and  its application necessarily depends on the particular facts of each  case. I think, in the circumstances of this case, that I am prepared  to hold that the Bank acted honestly (that is not in dispute) and  reasonably and ought fairly to be excused to the extent of the  surrender value of the policies transferred to the boys at the date  of the transaction, about £650, but no doubt the exact figure can  be ascertained. I do not see how the Bank can properly be relieved  to any greater extent. The fact that the mother paid the premiums  for a few years, so enhancing the value of the policies, is (so  far as the Bank is concerned) as irrelevant as the fact that, as  was to be expected, in due course the boys gave the policies back  to their mother, and so, of course, to the Commander, thereby  losing all benefit from them.

LORD JUSTICE WILLMER: Mr Bagnall and Mr Home, you have heard that we propose to give you time to consider what we have said before you come and discuss the appropriate form of order. Perhaps you will communicate with the court through the usual channels when you are ready to do so.

Mr BAGNALL: I am obliged to your Lordship.

LORD JUSTICE WILLMER: I should add that when you are ready, it will be necessary to reconstitute the court, so we will appreciate It If you can give as long notice as possible.

Mr BAGNALL: I am grateful to your Lordships for dealing with the matter in that way. I do not know whether your Lordship had it in mind that my learned friend and I, or perhaps our learned juniors, should attempt to agree some minute of order, or whether you think that we should merely study the Judgment and discuss the matter.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN: If you can agree, so much the better .

Mr BAGNALL: I apprehend there would be no difficulty in agreeing a form of order to give effect to the Judgment; but it may well be, of course, that agreement and harmony will disappear on the question of costs.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN: I think that may be safely anticipated!

Mr BAGNALL: But it would perhaps be helpful to everyone if some document were before the court.

LORD JUSTICE WILLMER: Yes, I think it would be most helpful. If you will put your heads together and perhaps reach some measure of agreement, so much the better.

Mr BAGNALL: That will leave the question of costs to be argued, and any further relief for which anyone may be minded to ask.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN: Copies of the main Judgment are available, but my supplemental Judgment is not yet available, but it will be if you apply for it tomorrow or the day after.

Mr BAGNALLs Speaking rather at the moment without fully considering it, my Lord, it may very well be possible to include in the minute of order the part your Lordships have dealt with separately without actually seeing the Judgment. It is quite a short point.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN: Yes, probably. The view of the majority of the court, of course, is in the main Judgment.

Mr BAGNALL: If your Lordship pleases.


]
[

LORD JUSTICE WILIMER: The Judgment which I am about to read is the Judgment of the Court, which deals with and resolves all the points which have been argued except one, and in relation to that one there is, unhappily, a disagreement between the members of the Court, and on that one point we will deliver separate Judgments when I have read the Judgment of the Court.

This is indeed a sorry story, and one which reflects no credit at all on any of the parties to it. When Miss Pauling, the plaintiffs' mother (and we shall refer to her throughout as "the mother") married their father (to whom we shall refer as "the Commander) she was a young lady of considerable fortune. She was marrying a naval officer who had almost no fortune at all, and by the wisdom, no doubt, of her parents, it was decided to vest her fortune in trustees of the trusts of a marriage settlement. The whole object of this transaction was to prevent the use (or rather misuse) of the lady's capital for the very purposes for which in fact it had been very largely frittered away, that is, in the ordinary living expenses of the family. Apart from a power to raise £10,000 out of the settlement (which had been exercised long before the history of this action starts) it was intended that the mother should have nothing more than the income during her life, and she was restrained from anticipating that.

In June of the year 1948 the trust funds were intact, and amounted to over £70,000. By June 1954 the Bank had raised and paid away over £29,000 from the capital of these funds in purported exercise of a power of advancement, and there was nothing whatever left to show for it. How had this melancholy event happened? It was in part due to a misunderstanding of a power of advancement contained in the settlement, which was in rather unusual form, and later on to its plain misuse, but also was largely due to the charm of manner and powers of persuasion of the Commander. The learned trial Judge has found the Bank liable to replace nearly £15,000 as having been expended in breach of trust for which they can be compelled to account. Both parties appeal.

The relevant transactions over this period of six years are many, and involve each of the four children of the marriage. Different questions arise in respect of most of these transactions, and accordingly we propose in this Judgment first to set out the basic facts, then to state our view of the legal questions that have been argued before us, and finally to deal seriatim with the facts of each advance and to apply the law accordingly.

The plaintiffs, the children of the Commander and the mother, are: (1) A son, Francis, born on the 15th October, 1920; (2) A son, George, born on the 11th October, 1925; (3) A daughter, Ann (now Mrs Broadbent) born on the 24th March, 1928; (4) A son, Anthony, born on the 15th June, 1930.

As already stated, the marriage settlement was of funds supplied entirely by the mother. The defendants, Coutts & Company (to whom we shall refer as ''the Bank") have all along been the sole trustees. Apart from the special power to raise £10,000 for the mother's use which we have already mentioned, the settlement followed the usual lines of such an instrument. The mother had the income of the trust fund for life without power of anticipation and after her death her husband was to have an annuity of £500 a year. Provision was also made for the mother to have power to appoint a life interest in half of the trust fund to any surviving husband. Subject thereto, the trust fund was to be held in trust for the children or remoter issue of the mother, whether by the intended or any future marriage, in such shares as the mother might appoint, and in default of appointment the children were to take in equal shares on attaining the age of twenty-one, or being female marrying under that age. Clause 11 of the settlement, under which the Bank purported to act in making the advances complained of, provided as follows: 

"It shall be lawful for the trustees at any time or times after the death of the wife or In her lifetime with her consent in writing to raise any part or parts not exceeding in the whole one-half of the then expectant or presumptive or vested share of any child or more remote issue of the wife in the said trust premises under the trusts hereinbefore contained and to pay the same to him or her for his or her own absolute use or to pay or apply the same for his or her advancement or otherwise for his or her benefit in such manner as the trustees shall think fit ...". 

By clause 14 power was conferred on the trustees during the life of the mother, and with her consent in writing, to lay out a sum not exceeding £10,000 in the purchase of a house as a residence for the wife, and in its decoration, repair or improvement, provided that such house was situated in England, Wales, Scotland or Ireland. Lastly, provision was made for the Bank to act as bankers in respect of the trust funds without being liable to account for profits, and to be remunerated for their services in accordance with their published scale of fees. Messrs Charles Russell & Co. were nominated as solicitors to the trust with permission to the Bank to consult its own solicitors in any case in which it should think fit. These were Messrs Parrer & Co,

It should at this stage be stated that at all material times the mother had an account with the Bank. The Commander did not have any separate bank account with the Bank, but he was authorised to draw on the mother's account, and it appears that it was he who largely controlled it. During most of the time with which we are concerned this account was substantially overdrawn.

In addition to the funds subject to the settlement, the mother also enjoyed a small life interest under the will of her deceased father. There were also certain shares standing in the joint names of the Commander and his mother. Apart from these small additional sources of income, the family were wholly dependent on the income derived from the marriage settlement. The evidence shows that the family were quite unable to adapt themselves to the changed conditions of life after the last war, and expected to continue on the scale of life suitable between the wars, with the result that the available income was always overspent so that the Commander was always hard up for money.

Now as to the questions of law involved in this appeal. First as to the true meaning and intent of the power in clause 11. This power has been accepted as containing two limbs, first a power with the consent of the mother in her lifetime to raise any part or parts not exceeding in the whole one-half of the expectant, presumptive or vested share of any child, and to pay the same to him or her for his or her absolute use, and, secondly, the more usual power to pay or apply the same for his or her advancement or otherwise for his or her benefit in such manner as the Bank might think fit. It was argued that the power contained in the first limb was wider than that in the second, although it was conceded on both sides that in both cases the power was fiduciary. 

Having regard to the very wide interpretation given to the statutory power (which approximates to the second limb in Pauling's Settlement) by their Lordships' House in re Pilkington (1962 volume 3 Weekly Law Reports, page 1051) we cannot see that the ambit of the first limb of the power substantially differs from that of the second limb. But, as all the advances were made in purported exercise of the first limb, we must examine the argument upon it. Being a fiduciary power, it seems to us quite clear that the power can be exercised only if it is for the benefit of the child or remoter issue to be advanced or, as was said during argument, it is thought to be "a good thing'' for the advanced person to have a share of capital before his or her due time. That this must be so, we think, follows from a consideration of the fact that the parties to a settlement intend the normal trusts to take effect, and that a power of advancement be exercised only if there is some good reason for it. That good reason must be beneficial to the person to be advanced it cannot be exercised capriciously or with some other benefit in view. The trustees, before exercising the power, have to weigh on the one side the benefit to the proposed advancee, and on the other hand the rights of those who are or may hereafter become interested under the trusts of the settlement. We reject Sir Milner Holland's argument on behalf of the Bank to the effect that an advancement can be made under the first limb which is not for the benefit of the advanced person. Furthermore, it is clear that the power under the first limb may be exercised, if the circumstances warrant it, either by making an out and out payment to the person to be advanced, or for a particular purpose specified by the trustees. Thus in argument an example was given that when George was called to the Bar, the trustees might have quite properly advanced to him a sum of capital quite generally for his living expenses to support him while starting to practice provided they thought that this was a reasonable thing to do, and that he was a type of person who could reasonably be trusted to make proper use of the money. On the other hand, if the trustees make the advance for a particular purpose which they state, they can quite properly pay it over to the advancee if they reasonably think they can trust him or her to carry out the prescribed purpose. What they cannot do is to prescribe a particular purpose, and then raise and pay the money over to the advancee leaving him or her entirely free, legally and morally, to apply it for that purpose or to spend it in any way he or she chooses, without any responsibility upon the trustees even to inquire as to its application.

Failure to appreciate this was one of the root causes of the trouble, for in the first opinion of counsel in 1948 (to which we shall refer later) he advised that the trustees could make an advancement out and out for the purpose of a purchase of a house in the Isle of Man, but he said this purchase "depends on a voluntary act by the children, and they should, I think, be separately advised on this point. So far as the trustees are concerned, they will be paying the money to the children for their own absolute use". This, we think, was the wrong approach. At that time both Francis and George were studying at university, and it was not suggested that they required any sum for their maintenance there; the only possible justification for advancing the very substantial sum of £5,000 to each of the two boys, one of them twenty-seven and the other just twenty-two, who had no other possible proper use for this money, was to invest it in a house in the Isle of Man as the settlement powers were insufficient, and the advancement could be justified only for that purpose. This error was perpetuated later by the childrens' solicitor, who got into the habit of advising them that, although purported advancements were, for example, for the repair of a house or for the purchase of furniture, they were sums which the children could "blue", for example, on a horse.

This was wrong and misleading advice. If money was advanced for an express purpose by the Bank, the advanced person was under a duty to carry that purpose out, and he could not properly apply it to another. We are not concerned with the question whether in such circumstances the Bank could recover money so misapplied, but this much is plain, that if such misapplication came to their notice, they could not safely make further advances for particular purposes without making sure that the money was in fact applied to that purpose, since the advancee would have shown him or herself quite irresponsible. It would be their duty to proceed on future occasions on behalf of the particular child under the second limb of the power.

The first question, therefore, that arises in relation to each of the advances, which we shall consider seriatim, is whether there was a proper exercise of the power under either limb. No question arises as to the consent of the mother, for that was given in every case. If the advance were proper in any particular case, the question of the children's consent, although adult, would not arise; for as has been made quite clear in re  Pilkington (supra) as there is no express provision in clause 11 requiring the adult beneficiaries' consent to the advance being made for his or her benefit, it would not be necessary to obtain that consent, though no doubt any trustee intending to advance an adult beneficiary would normally do so only with his consent, and probably only at his request. But, if any advance were an improper exercise of the power in clause 11 (and they all were in the learned Judge's view) what is the position? Prima facie, having improperly exercised the power, the Bank would be guilty of a breach of trust and must replace the money misapplied.

Now Mr Bagnall, for the plaintiffs, has made it clear that in this action each beneficiary is suing to recover only the advances purported to have been made to him or her, or for his or her benefit. This is not a case where any beneficiary is seeking to compel the trustees to replace trust funds wrongly applied, or paid away to some other beneficiary. Had that been the case, different considerations would, no doubt, have applied. But in the circumstances of this case it is clear to us that if the Bank can establish a valid request or consent by the advanced beneficiary to the advance in question, that is a good defence on the part of the Bank to the beneficiary's claim, even though it be plain that the advance was made in breach of trust. But (and this is really the second question) this consent or request, Mr Bagnall submitted, must be the spontaneous act of the child; and it has been alleged in the pleadings that in the circumstances of this case each of the children at the time of the respective advances to them must be presumed to have been under the undue influence of their parents as they had but recently attained full age; therefore, he says, their requests and consents cannot be relied upon by the Bank.

The doctrine of undue influence, much discussed before us, merely arises out of the fact that, while equity approves of gifts by a father to a child, and therefore invented the doctrine of presumption of advancement, so on the other hand it dislikes and distrusts gifts by a child to a parent, and therefore invented the presumption of undue influence. Both these presumptions merely mean, in our opinion, that in the absence of evidence, or if the evidence on each side be evenly balanced, in the first case equity will presume that the parent who puts property in a child's name intends to make a gift or give a benefit to the child, while on the other hand money or property passing from the child to the parent cannot be retained by the latter because it is assumed that so unnatural a transaction would have been brought about by undue use of the natural influence that a parent has over a child, and of the filial obedience which a child owes to his parent. Both presumptions may be rebutted; each is in truth a convenient device in aid of decisions on facts often lost in obscurity, whether owing to the lapse of time or the death of the parties.

Where the presumption of undue influence exists, a gift by a child cannot be retained by a parent unless he or she can show first that the gift was the spontaneous act of the child; secondly, that the child knew what his rights were; and thirdly it is desirable, though not essential, that a child should have independent, and if possible professional advice, before making a gift. "The court", said Lord Justice Cotton in A Hoard v. Skinner (1887 volume 36 Chancery Division, page 145, at page 171) "sets aside the voluntary gift, unless it is proved that in fact the gift was the spontaneous act of the donor acting under circumstances which enabled him to exercise an independent will and which justifies the court in holding that the gift was the result of a free exercise of the donor's will". The whole question is fully discussed in the leading case of Hugenin v. Baseley (volume 14 Vesey, page 273) and the notes to that case in White and Tudor, Eighth Edition, volume 1, at pages 259-302. The result is well stated by Mr Justice Parwell in Powell v. Powell (1900 volume 1 Chancery Division, at page 246): 

"A man of mature age and experience can make a gift to his father or mother because he stands free of all over-riding influence except such as may spring from what I may call filial piety; but a young person (male or female) just of age requires the intervention of an independent mind and will, acting on his or her behalf and interest solely, in order to put him or her on an equality with the maturer donor who is capable of taking care of himself".

The question of the duration of the presumption has also been much discussed. Lord Cranworth considered that it should be taken as a period of a year after the child attained twenty-one; see Smith v. Kay (volume 7 House of Lords Cases, page 750 at page 772) but this has not been received with approval. In our judgment the question is one of fact and degree. One begins with a strong presumption In the case of a child just twenty-one living at home, and this will grow less and loss as the child goes out in the world and leaves the shelter of his home. Nevertheless, the presumption normally lasts only a " short" time after the child has attained twenty-one; see Lancashire Loans Limited v. Black (1934 volume 1 King's Bench Division, page 380, per Lord Justice Greer at page 419) and it seems impossible and undesirable to define it further. A married daughter with a separate establishment of her own may be emancipated directly she attains twenty-one, whereas a spinster who has never left home might be able to rely on the presumption for a longer period. We reject, however, Mr Bagnall's submission that this presumption continues indefinitely until it is proved that the undue influence has ceased to exist. That is to confuse a case of actual undue influence with the presumption. On the other hand, it may be difficult for a spinster daughter living at home to prove a case of actual undue influence for many years after she has attained the age of twenty-one. In the present case it is important to remember that only the presumption is relied on; no actual undue influence is alleged.

Then Sir Milner argued that trustees who have obtained no benefit from payments induced by undue influence could not be hold liable, and that the only person who could be sued would be the parent presumed to have exercised the undue influence, or any person (short of a bona fide purchaser for value) who received the benefit of the payments. On the other hand, Mr Bagnall argued that the Bank were in the position of volunteers, and therefore could not escape the consequences of dealing in breach of trust with a beneficiary presumed to have been actuated by the undue influence of a third party; they wore at risk just as any other volunteer who takes the property acquired in breach of trust.

In the circumstances of this case, we do not think it necessary to express a concluded opinion upon this matter except to say that we reject Sir Milner Holland's argument that the Bank cannot be made liable unless they received some benefit from the breach of trust. It seems to us in principle that a trustee dealing in breach of trust with a beneficiary who has just attained the age of twenty-one years must realise the danger that such beneficiary may be acting under the influence of a parent. We do not see how a trustee can possibly escape the consequences of that knowledge. Some support for this view is to be found in King v. King (volume 1 De Gex & Jones's Reports, page 663) a case of a suspected fraud on a power.

Without expressing a final opinion, we think that the true view may be that a trustee carrying out a transaction in breach of trust may be liable if he know, or ought to have known, that the beneficiary was acting under the undue influence of another, or may be presumed to have done so, but will not be liable if it cannot be established that he so knew, or ought to have known.

That is sufficient for the purposes of the present case, for, of course, the Bank knew very exactly the ages of each of the children, and they knew further that as each child attained twenty-one, that child received advances from the Bank which went straight into the banking account of the mother. Indeed, in Ann's case plans were made to effect this unhappy result even before the child attained twenty-one. Accordingly, it seems to us clear that if it can be established that the presumption exists in any given case, the Bank are fixed with notice of it and cannot rely on any consents given under such influence.

The Bank also rely for relief from the consequences of any breach of trust upon section 61 of the Trustee Act 1925. At this stage all we propose to say is that it would be a misconstruction of the section to say that it does not apply to professional trustees, but, as was pointed out in the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council in National Trustees Company of Australasia Limited v. General Finance Company of Australia Limited (1905 Appeal Cases, page 373 at page 381) "Without saying that the remedial provisions of the section should never be applied to a trustee in the position of the appellants, their Lordships think it is a circumstance to be taken into account". Where a banker undertakes to act as a paid trustee of a settlement created by a customer, and so deliberately places itself in a position where its duty as trustee conflicts  with its interest as a banker, we think that the court should be  very slow to relieve such a trustee under the provisions of the  section.

We propose to deal with the bank's plea of the Limitation  Act 1939 and the pleas of laches, acquiescence and delay when we  have considered the detailed transactions. It only remains to state  that the question of law upon which this case was reported in the  court below, re Pauling's Settlement Trusts (1962 volume 1 Weekly  Law Reports, page 86) has not been argued before us, and many of  the cases there cited have not been cited to us. Mr Bagnall,  however, accepts as accurate the proposition which is contained in  the paragraph in the middle of page 108 of the report. We express  no opinion on it.

We now deal with the impugned transactions seriatim. Up to 1947 the family lived in a large country house in Gloucestershire purchased with marriage settlement funds under the power contained in clause 14 already mentioned. When it became necessary, owing to financial stringency, to sell this house, the Commander conceived the idea of purchasing a house in the Isle of Man, one of his principal objects being to reduce his tax liability. It was then discovered that the purchase of a house in the Isle of Man was not authorised by the terms of the marriage settlement, and this led to the Commander taking advice from Messrs Charles Russell & Co., who in turn sought counsel's opinion. Counsel confirmed the view that there was no power under clause 14 of the settlement to purchase a house in the Isle of Man, but he advised that the desired object could possibly be achieved in a different way by invoking the power of advancement to the children of the marriage under clause 11.

By this time the two eldest children, Francis and George, were over twenty-one, and counsel advised that if they were agreeable advances could be made to them of sums sufficient to enable a house to be bought, which they could then settle voluntarily on their mother for life with remainder to themselves. Counsel emphasised, however, that this could be done only by a voluntary act on the part of the children, and he recommended that they should be separately advised. We have already criticised counsel's approach to clause 11. Francis and George proved to be agreeable to the course suggested, but both disclaimed any desire to be separately advised. Accordingly, on the 10th January 1948 the mother requested the Bank in writing to raise up to £10,000 from capital, and pay the same as might be directed by her two sons, Francis and George. Francis and George joined in signing a memorandum dated the 12th January 1948, the material part of which was in the following terms: 

"We, the undersigned, Francis George Younghusband and George Oswald Younghusband, hereby authorise and request you to apply such sums as may be made available for our advancement under Mrs Younghusband's request to you dated 10th January 1948 in purchasing a property in the Isle of Man, which it is our intention to settle in accordance with the suggestion contained in the opinion of counsel dated the 12th December 1947 in a settlement in which you are to be the trustees''. 

In due course the Commander found a house called "Oakhill Lodge" in the Isle of Man, which was duly purchased at auction on the 4th August 1948 for £8,450 and became the family home for the next seven years.

The Commander could not boar to see such a valuable asset as a house on which spending money could be raised disappearing into a settlement on the mother and her two children. At an early stage, long before the house was purchased, the Bank, on the Commander's instructions, had told Charles Russell & Co. that It was not intended to settle any of the money to be advanced; yet this change of plan, strangely enough, brought forth no protest, or even comment, from Bank or solicitors. But worse was to follow. On the 22nd October 1948 the Bank wore writing to Francis about completion of the purchase in the joint names of "you and your brother". Yet on the 26th October they wrote this to the Isle of Man solicitors acting for them in connection with the conveyances "Commander and Mrs Younghusband's marriage settlement. We are favoured with your letter of the 23rd of this month, reference ADK/MT, add in reply beg to say that Oakhill is being purchased with money being taken out of the above-mentioned trust and placed at the disposal of the two eldest sons of Commander and Mrs Younghusband for their advancement under the powers given to us by the settlement. You will appreciate, therefore, that the house will not have to be convoyed to us. It is on the instructions of the two sons that the remittance of £7,605 is to be made to you to enable you to complete the purchase, but Commander Younghusband has told us this morning that it is their wish that the conveyance should be in favour of himself and Mrs Younghusband" . Not one word of protest was raised by the Bank at this complete reversal of the scheme envisaged by counsel. They quite calmly applied the money raised for the benefit of the sons in the purchase of a house for the Commander and the mother. They never obtained the consent of the sons to this, and the evidence was that the sons never did consent.

The subsequent history of the house was that shortly afterwards it was mortgaged by the Commander for £5,000, which sum, was apparently spent as income. When financial disaster overtook the Commander in 1955 (as a result of which he was made bankrupt in the Isle of Man) the house was sold for loss than the amount of the mortgage, so that in the event Francis and George lost the whole of their £8,450.

Making all due allowance for the fact that the Bank may have misunderstood the effect of clause 11, it does not explain their complete laxity in permitting this transaction to go forward. Even at this early stage they wholly failed to exercise any powers or duties as trustees, and thought only of themselves as bankers to the Commander and the mother. We doubt whether the original advance, if counsel's advice had been carried out, would have been a proper exercise of the power, but no harm could come of it for the new settlement would replace the old, and the position would be safeguarded. But having regard to the way in which the transaction was in fact carried out, they have no defence to the claim to replace this sum, and it is not surprising that the contrary was hardly argued. Any relief under section 61 is out of the question.

This sorry tale of the house does not even end there. On the same day on which the deposit was paid is found the first payment made direct into the mother's account, then heavily overdrawn. This was a sum of £1,000. The payment arose out of advice given on the 10th June 1948 by the Bank's solicitors to the effect that it would be proper, in addition to advancing money on the house (upon the footing, of course, that it would be settled on the sons) to advance a sum for the purpose of furnishing it. The first mention of amount emanated from the Commander, who fixed it arbitrarily at £1,000, a sum to which he obtained his sons' assent on the 18th August. The trustees accepted this without inquiry, no doubt upon the footing that the house would be conveyed to the sons and their consent was given only on that footing. That assumption was still valid on the 13th September 1948 when the sum was credited to the mother's account. The learned Judge found that, this being so, there had been a valid consent, and the Bank was excused.

We do not accept this. This payment was bound up with the question of the house itself. Once the Bank realised there was to be no settlement, it was the duty of the Bank to reconsider the whole project. Then, when the Bank realised that the house was not going to belong to the boys, but to their parents, the impropriety of purchasing furniture with the boys' money became obvious. Yet they took no steps to remedy the situation. The Bank never even took any steps to see whether any furniture was in fact purchased, and none (or almost none) in fact was. All that happened was that the mother's overdraft was reduced by £1,000, The Bank was in a delicate position. Their interest as bankers conflicted with their duties as trustees, as they had indeed shown themselves well aware in their letter earlier in the same year. The Bank acted in plain breach of their duty most unreasonably, and no question of relief under section 61 of the Trustee Act 1925 can arise. The appeal is allowed so far as this advance is concerned.

Long before the purchase of the house was completed the Commander (inspired apparently by the reasoning of counsel's opinion)  conceived the idea that the powers of advancement conferred by  clause 11 of the settlement could be used for the purpose of raising  further sums up to one-half of each child's presumptive share in the  capital of the trust fund, which sums could then be used for paying  off Mrs Younghusband's overdraft, and for living expenses. It was  calculated that each child's presumptive share, allowing for a  reserve to meet death duties in the event of Mrs Younghusband dying  within five years, would be about £14,000. The Commander therefore  embarked upon a plan for raising approximately £7,000 to be advanced  nominally to each child on attaining the age of twenty-one.  With this object in view, the Commander early in 1948  suggested to the Bank that further sums be advanced to Francis and  George up to a total of approximately £14,000 with the objects of  paying off (a) a loan of £2,600 which the Bank, as trustees of  another settlement (by a Mrs Hodson) had advanced to the mother,  and (b) the overdraft on the mother's account, which then stood at  about £3,000. The Hodson loan was secured by the mother's life  interest under her father's will and by four policies on her life to  a total value of £3,000, the surrender value of which was then about  £650.

The Commander's first letter on the subject is characteristic and discloses the whole schemes "(2) W.R.T. yr. RSC27 of 21/1 for which many thanks. Would you be kind enough, in that case, to get a memo, signed by our two sons along the lines of the proposed draft attached herewith? Otherwise, as I pointed out in my 17/1, a house we may want to buy might well get sold before we could pay a deposit. We would, of course, get legal advice here before signing a contract. To satisfy a vendor that we were entitled to sign one, I suppose we would need a statement from you that the £10,000 was available? (3) As this money can be advanced to our sons unconditionally (which I hadn't realised) wouldn't it be advantageous for all concerned to advance them the full amount possible (£7,000 each, I think you said in a previous letter) and use the balance not needed for the house to pay off first the Hodson loan of (I think) £3,000, and second, as much as possible of our overdraft of £3,000 ?

From investments yielding about 3 per cent we are now paying 5 per cent on the loans plus, in the first case, 3 per cent life insurance, (4) If you agree, would you please send memos, to effect this to my wife and sons for their signatures ? If you cannot do so without further legal advice, it might be as well to await our arrival before asking for it so that we can make sure that we narrow the question as much as possible to avoid unnecessary charges".

This letter led to another lamentable and indeed inexplicable transaction. The Bank did not at first view these suggestions with much sympathy, and expressed doubt as to whether this would be a proper exercise of their power under clause 11 of the settlement. They took advice from Messrs Charles Russell & Co., whose advice was no more encouraging. The Commander, however, was importunate and apparently very persuasive. He dropped for the time being the suggestion of making advances to Francis and George to enable them to pay off the mother's overdraft, but he continued to press his suggestion for raising money to pay off the Hodson loan.

In due course Messrs Charles Russell & Co. advised that, subject to the Bank being prepared to exercise their discretion, this might be a proper exercise of the power conferred by clause 11 provided that Francis and George received an adequate quid pro quo. What was envisaged was (a) that the four life policies should be assigned absolutely to Francis and George; (b) that the mother should execute a covenant to maintain the premiums on the policies; and (c) that the mother should also execute a covenant to pay a fair rate of interest on the money advanced. This would result in Francis and George receiving £3,000 on the death of the mother in return for the £2,600 advanced, as well as having an immediately income from the payment of the interest. Messrs Charles Russell & Co. further recommended that Francis and George should be separately advised.

In pursuance of this, Mr Burrell of Messrs Farrer & Co. was instructed on their behalf. He interviewed Francis and George, explained the suggested arrangement to them, and satisfied himself that they wished it to be carried out. He advised, however, that in addition to the other requirements, the mother should execute a codicil to her will giving a legacy to Francis and George of such an amount as would cover the death duties payable on the policies in the event of her dying within five years.

The scheme as advised by Charles Russell & Co. might at a pinch be justified as an exercise of the power under clause 11, though we cannot understand how a charge on the mother's life interest under her other settlement was omitted, but as carried out the transaction was disastrously different.

The necessary assignment was drafted by Messrs Charles Russell & Co. and was in due course executed by the mother, who also made a codicil to her will. Whether or not due to an oversight, the assignment as drafted and executed contained no express covenant on the part of the mother either to maintain the premiums on the policies or to pay any interest to Francis and George on the amount advanced. Mr Burrell, however, approved the draft on behalf of the boys without ever consulting them. Accordingly, in due course, at the request of the mother, and with the consent of Francl3 and George, a sum of £2,600 was raised and paid over to the mother, who applied it for paying off the Hodson loan. It is important to observe that although legal advice was taken in connection with this transaction, and although Francis and George were separately advised, the transaction as actually carried out differed materially and to the disadvantage of Francis and George from that which had been advised and explained to them. All the sons got in return for the expenditure of £2,600 extracted from their expectancies and paid to the Bank in release of their mother's debt were policies with a surrender value of £650, and probably an implied covenant to keep up payment of the premiums.

The payment of this sum was a clear breach of trust. In this case the sons did have separate advice, but what they approved was the proposed, not the actual, transaction, of which latter they never knew, and to which they never consented. How their solicitor came to approve the assignment, we cannot understand. He completely failed in his duty to his clients. The boys never saw it, and though expressed to be parties, never executed it; this was, no doubt, unnecessary. Yet Mr Burrell wrote this letter to the Bank; 

"Dear Sirs, Commander and Mrs Younghusband's marriage settlement. We enclose a copy of the letter which Mr Fletcher, of Messrs Charles Russell & Co., has written to Mr Burrell. We have now satisfied ourselves that, so far as the sons are concerned, this matter is in a satisfactory state, and therefore we should be obliged if you would complete it with Mr Fletcher when he makes an appointment to do so. We are, dear sirs, Yours faithfully, Farrer & Co." 

A less satisfactory state could hardly be imagined.

Charles Russell & Co. equally failed in their duty to the Bank to see that the transaction was carried out in accordance with the advice they had given. As carried out, the transaction plainly could not be justified as an exercise of the power under clause 11, and, of course, the Bank cannot hide behind the negligence of their own advisers for whose neglect they must, as between them and their beneficiaries, assume full responsibility.

The payment being, therefore, a plain breach of trust, the fact that the boys were badly advised is no defence for the Bank. The Bank must show that the boys consented to the breach of trust; this on the evidence they cannot do.

The members of the court differ, however, upon the question whether the Bank should be relieved under section 61 of the Trustee Act, and if so to what extent. On this point alone, therefore, separate Judgments will be delivered.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN. Later in 1948 the Commander returned to the suggestion of raising another £2,000 so as to bring the total advanced to Francis and George up to approximately £14,000. The Bank was not at first prepared to make this further advance, and in this it was supported by the advice of Messrs Charles Russell & Go. The Commander, however, continued to press his request, and alleged that the money was needed to pay for improvements to the recently purchased house in the Isle of Man. At the request of the Bank, he promised to submit accounts in respect of the improvements, showing what had been or had to be paid, but in fact this was never done. Eventually, at an interview which took place in April 1949, when the Commander was on a visit to London, he prevailed upon the Bank to let him have a form for Francis and George to sign, or at least instructions as to what they should say in order to justify the proposed advance of £2,000. He is recorded as having informed the Bank that Francis and George would sign whatever was necessary. This remark is highly relevant to the question (which we shall consider later) as to the extent to which Francis and George at this date could be said to be emancipated from parental influence. The upshot was that on or about the 29th April 1949 Francis and George signed a document drafted by the Bank in the following terms with reference to the further sum of not exceeding £2,000 which you are raising in accordance with the terms of the above-mentioned settlement for payment to us in equal shares by way of advancement, we hereby authorise and request you to place the money when raised to the account in your hooks of Mrs R, Violet Younghusband. We fully appreciate that the money in question has been or is being used for the purpose of making improvements to the property in the Isle of Man "belonging to Mrs Younghusband", As a result, £2,000 was raised and on the 13th May 1949 paid into the mother's account. It will be seen that in this case there was no pretence that the money raised was being used for the benefit of Francis and George.

Furthermore, it will be observed that this was not a request "by the sons to make an advance, but a consent to a transaction already decided upon by the Bank. The document emanates from the Bank and was forwarded to the father by them with a view to him procuring the signatures. Its object was to protect the Bank against what we cannot help thinking they knew very well to be a breach of trust. The sons had no separate advice. Nevertheless, they were of age, and competent to make their parents a present if they really wished, and the only question is whether the document we have just read was procured by the presumed undue influence of the father. We have already discussed the law on this matter, and the real question is whether on the facts the presumption applies to this case. If it does, the Bank has made no attempt to rebut it.

It seems to us that the whole picture must be looked at, and it is from the documents that a fairly clear view can be had. It does not appear that the mother, the source of the money, was more than a cypher willing to sign whatever her husband put before her. He controlled the family fortune by his right to draw on the family banking account, and he assumed throughout that what he says will go. As we have already said, he was the originator of all the transactions complained of here. His method was to cajole the Bank into going as far as they thought they dared, and then to prepare what he called "chits" (or sometimes got them prepared by the Bank) and send them to his wife or the child or children concerned for signature. So far this looks like a typical case where undue influence ought to be presumed, but the Judge, who saw the witnesses, was chary of acting upon the presumption. The impression he got was of a united family determined to extract from the Bank by hook or by crook the money necessary to continue its extravagant way of life. On this view of it, the passage we have quoted about the sons being willing to sign anything bears a less sinister aspect.

At the time of this advance the son George was twenty-three years old. He had done his military service, and was up at Cambridge. The Judge thought him an exceptionally able young man, well acquainted with his rights, and able to take care of himself. He had no separate advice about this £2,000 advance, but he had been advised about the Hodson loan transaction, and in the course of receiving the explanations then offered he must have realised what the power was which the trustees were purporting to exercise. Indeed, the fatal opinion of counsel advising on the possibility of using clause 11 to purchase a house in the Isle of Man was, on the evidence, familiar not only to George, but to Ann. The Judge held that he was emancipated from parental control, and well enough acquainted with his position to make his consent to this advance binding upon him, and this court cannot reverse that finding, depending, as it does, so much upon the demeanour of the witness.

The case of the other son, Francis, is quite different. He was at this time twenty-eight years old, and was apparently living for the most part with his grandmother, so that he was removed from immediate parental control. On the other hand, we now know that he was a schizophrenic. This diagnosis had been made in 1940 when he found one day of life in the Air Force altogether too much for him, and was repeated by a doctor who saw him in 1951. He was not called by either side, it being agreed that his memory was not at all to be trusted. Consent to this, as to other transactions in which he was involved, was written out and sent to him by his father. There is no letter from him anywhere in the correspondence. No representative of the Bank ever saw him. He was obviously left purposely in the background.

On the other hand, he was capable of teaching in a boys' school, which he did for two years towards the end of the war, and was accepted for entry to Edinburgh University after the war, where also he continued for two years as a student. Further, when he went with his brother to be advised over the Hodson loans the partner in Farrer & Co. who saw him thought him capable of understanding the transaction. Moreover, it has never been alleged that he was at any material time incapacitated from contracting or conducting business affairs by reason of his mental health, though we cannot think that if the Bank had known of his history of ill health, they would have acted on the consents he returned signed to his father. But the Bank did not know the facts. We have considered anxiously whether, before making an advance, they should have made some inquiry into his circumstances. It Is alleged in the particulars of the statement of claim (paragraph 10) that the law presumes undue influence to exist between a person suffering from mental Ill-health and the person with whom he resides but in the end Mr Bagnall rightly abandoned this plea, for there is no such presumption though actual undue influence may not be difficult to prove. The presumption exists only as to the medical adviser. On the whole, we do not feel able to say that the presumption of undue influence must be held to exist between Francis and his parents having regard to his age and his absence from home, and we conclude that the Bank were not bound to make inquiries as to his state of mind or fitness as an object of the power they were affecting to exercise.

Accordingly, though this was the plainest breach of trust, we agree with the learned Judge that the Bank have a good defence, for they obtained consents from the two children concerned, and they were emancipated.

The completion of this transaction exhausted the amount which could be raised for the purpose of advancement to Francis and George. The next victim on the list was the daughter Ann. Even before she attained twenty-one in March 1949, her father was looking about for ways of spending her money, and broaching the subject to the Bank. He very soon seems to have concluded that, having acquired a country residence at the expense of his sons, it would now be a good plan to get a town house at the expense of his daughter. It is indeed fortunate for her that the proposed house, which was in Chelsea, was put into her name, probably to preserve the fiction that the parents were living in the Isle of Man.

The Commander's campaign began in February of 1949, and the proposal for a Chelsea house which he found first emerged on the 14th March, his daughter being still an infant. The trustees had taken the advice of their solicitors as to their power of advancement, and had received the Delphic advice that it was not "qualified in any way". The solicitors added that the young lady should be separately advised. The Bank seems to have accepted without any qualms the Commander's proposal that the daughter's money should be used to buy the Chelsea house of his choice as a residence for the family. Why the Bank should entertain this proposal passes our comprehension. The girl was in her first year at Oxford, and there was no reason at all why her expectant share should be spent in buying a house and furnishing it for her family's use. A family in these comparatively straightened circumstances had no justification for having two houses. This project, in our judgment, was clearly an improper use of the power made in order to suit the father, and without any proper regard to the benefit of the daughter. Having regard to her age, it is clear that the presumption of undue influence applies to this transaction. She, however, was anxious to embark on this speculation. The house apparently was in a semi-ruinous condition, and was not a purchase on which trustees could properly have laid out trust money. They had power to buy a house out of capital, but this expedient was never even considered, again for fiscal reasons.

As we have said, Ann was luckier than her brothers, for the purchase was to be in her name, and she received separate advice by a solicitor who saw to it that the conveyance to her was properly concluded. A member of his firm also gave her excellent advice against the transaction which she chose to ignore. As a result, sums amounting in the whole to £4,789 were applied in the purchase and repair and decoration of this house. Luckily for the Bank, property in Chelsea of whatever sort has appreciated very much in value. When Ann married in the year 1952 the house became in truth hers, and she has since disposed of it to advantage and recognises that, having had the money once, she cannot claim it again.

This sum, however, did not exhaust her expectant share of £7,000, and under her father's influence a further sum of £3,260 was advanced to the father or the mother nominally for the further improvement and furnishing of the Chelsea house, but in fact spent on the Isle of Man house, or used to support her mother's overdraft. This sum Ann claims from the Bank in the action.

It is not at all easy to follow the sequence of events on this point. It seems plain enough that the Bank, after refusing to entertain the purchase of the Chelsea house, were talked into it by the Commander. In March they informed the father and Ann that they would not entertain the matter, but in the same month (and in spite of advice from their own solicitors against it) they changed their mind and agreed to pay for the price of the house and up to £1,000 for repairs. The first mention of furniture, apart from decorations, comes in a memorandum of the 21st March of an interview with the Commander which shows that he asked for an additional £1,000 to cover furniture. It does not appear when this was assented to, but apparently it was, for in September a sum of £660 was credited to Ann against money she paid to her father pretendedly for the purchase of furniture. In November a sum of £400 was credited to her mother for the same purpose, in the 14th January 1950 another £400, and in March £600 more. In May a further £200 was paid to the mother's account, and finally £1,000 on the 21st August. In the intervals between these payments the Bank made a few ineffectual protests and asked to see bills, but never insisted, and it is evident that they exercised no discretion at all as to the amount needed for furniture first stated to be £1,000, and gradually increased to reach £3,260.

There is no doubt that Ann asked for each of these sums to be advanced, and it is clear that on each such occasion that Ann requested these advances she did so in writing, and represented that they were required for furniture etc., well knowing in fact that only about £500 was expended on the purchase of furniture from start to finish. The rest went in the family living expenses through the mother's account. Of course, Ann appreciated that these representations were untrue; "silly lies", as she said in the witness-box. The Judge refused to give relief to Ann in these respects. He carefully set out the details of the payments. We think it is to be inferred that he did not believe that Ann was so innocent as she pretended in the witness-box, saying that she always regarded the money as her mother's. Nevertheless, the Judge was clearly of opinion that a presumption of undue influence applied in Ann's case because he stated it was essential that she should have independent advice upon the transaction. Independent advice she did have on the purchase of the house, but none upon the expenditure on furniture, which was quite a separate matter, and this the Judge overlooked. The Judge says that the Bank acted on the faith of untrue statements by Ann, and refused Ann relief on this ground. We cannot agree with this. If the Judge meant no more than that the Bank required some document signed by Ann stating that the money was required for furniture, we agree with him, but we do not think that the Bank can have really acted on a sincere belief in the truth of the representations; their supine conduct shows that they really could have no more than a pious hope which they did not dare to test by pressing to see receipts for the purchase of this vast quantity of furniture, that most of it was being invested in furniture. A moment's study of the mother's account at this time would have shown that even this was improbable. They merely wanted some document which, as they thought, would give legal justification for making the payments.

Further, it seems to us that these very untrue statements must be treated as issuing out of the presumed undue influence of her father made, as they were, either to the Bank in his presence, or by arrangement with him. Finally, we do not consider that these statements, if true, would, as the Judge held, have justified the advances, though furniture bought and taken by Ann and retained by her might have afforded some defence to the breach of trust. The Bank at this stage ought to have had their eyes wide open to the situation and insisted on calling a halt to this reckless expenditure apparently for furniture.

Ann by her counsel concedes that she must give credit for £300 of furniture actually purchased. Subject to that, we feel constrained to come to the conclusion that, without separate advice, the Bank cannot rely on the assent of this young girl to gifts direct into her mother's and father's pockets, and we hold the Bank liable in respect of advances numbered 8, 12, 17, 18, half of 20 and 22 as set out in the statement of claim, and pro tanto allow the appeal accordingly. Having behaved unreasonably, the Bank cannot rely on section 61.

Ann's portion had now been fully used, but there remained one chicken to be plucked, a younger brother, Anthony, then a young man serving with The Blues in Germany. He attained twenty-one on the 15th June 1951, and three days after that event there is recorded an interview with the father, the terms of which are too important to omit. 

"Date 18th June 1951. Interview with Commander Younghusband. They want £2,000 to be raised for the youngest son. Mr Burrell is to write to the boy explaining that the money will be his to do as he likes with, and when that has been done and we receive Mrs Younghusband's formal request we are to raise the money and get the boy's directions for its disposal".

As the Judge said, the process had become streamlined. So long as Mr Burrell could write a letter telling the boy the money was his, all else would be automatic. This is exactly what happened. Mr Burrell wrote a most perfunctory letter to the young man in Germany which he agreed in the witness-box could not constitute proper separate advice, and in fairness to him was not intended to be more than a pipe opener to a lawyer's relationship with a potential client, and between the 11th July 1951 and the 7th February 1952 £6,500 was paid straight into the mother's account. There is one payment which is characteristic. The father had succeeded to the tune of £1,000 in raising the wind by a charge on Ann's house, and half the first payment to Anthony was used to repay the Bank this amount, thus robbing Anthony to pay Ann. There was not even a pretence in any instance of any countervailing benefit to Anthony except as mentioned later. We do not feel any doubt that the Bank is liable on these payments, as the Judge held. Relief under section 61 is out of the question.

The story does not end there. In 1953 and 1954 the Bank revalued the assets in the trust. Accordingly, when the father in June 1952 "called to inquire whether he could borrow a few hundred pounds", the Bank (whose words these are) after looking into the figures, without any inquiry whatever as to the purpose except that the father was in what he called "an awful hole", cheerfully agreed to advance to him a further £1,200, and suggested that it should be taken out of the shares of Francis, George and Ann in shares designed to make their advances equal. Fortunately for him, Anthony escaped this raid. Between September 1953 and June 1954 the advances specified in the statement of claim under numbers 28 to 35 inclusive were made direct to the father or mother; they aggregated the grand total of £5,350. Nobody pretends that these were not breaches of trust, but they were assented to by each of the three children. We have already concluded that Francis and George must be taken to be emancipated by this time, and so, we hold, was Ann. She had been married in 1952 and was living in her Chelsea house with her husband. In these circumstances, the learned Judge rightly held that these sums were not recoverable. The Bank refused to make any further advances, not because of the slightest doubts as to the grave impropriety of their conduct over the last six years, but because they thought that if they parted with anything more, they might not be protected against a possible claim for estate duty if the mother should die within five years of any particular advance.

The Bank pleads the Limitation Act 1939, and as to this we wholly agree with what the learned Judge said and need not repeat it. So too as to the defence of laches. As to acquiescence, we think that this must be looked at rather broadly. We were, of course, pressed with the leading case of Allcard v. Skinner (volume 36 Chancery Division, page 1415), but in that case the plaintiff had had her rights fully explained to her by a brother, who was a barrister, and by her solicitor, and yet she took no steps until five or six years later. Even that gave rise to a difference of opinion in a very strong Court of Appeal.

In this case it would be wrong, we feel, to place any disability upon the beneficiaries because it so happened that George was a member of the Bar, and had been in well-known chambers. He had not been in Chancery chambers where it may be said that these things are better understood? but the real truth of the matter is that a party cannot be held to have acquiesced unless he knew, or ought to have known, what his rights were. On the facts of this case we cannot criticise any of the plaintiffs for failing to appreciate their rights until another learned junior, whom they consulted on a far fetched and futile scheme of George's for avoiding estate duty on his mother's death, advised that the advances might be improper. That was in the year 1954, and thereupon the family, headed, of course, by George, took immediate steps to explore this matter. This is a most complicated action, and many matters had to be explored before an action for breach of trust could properly be mounted. The writ was issued in 1958, and we do not think it right to hold that the plaintiffs were debarred by acquiescence from bringing an action which otherwise, to the extent we have indicated, is justified.

We have already dealt with the impact of section 61 in general and in detail as we have gone through the various impugned transactions, and on that we need say nothing further. That leaves only one matter for our consideration, for the learned Judge held that in regard to Anthony he ought to direct an account whereby Anthony would have to give credit for certain payments which he received from his mother's account. Anthony had an account with the Bank, and through the kindness of his parents received the benefit of an arrangement made long before the payments in question whereby, whenever he was overdrawn, his account should be replenished up to £40. If he overdrew to a greater extent than that, he did not receive this benefit but he was wise enough, as we look at his account, never to do so. Furthermore, he had received for some time a trivial allowance, for an officer in The Blues, of £25 a quarter from his parents. It was argued (and the learned Judge agreed in principle) that as his account wa3 being replenished in these ways from his parent's account, he should, instead of being able to claim that the whole amount of £6,500 should be replaced to the trust, bring into account the amount of money which had been transferred to his own personal account. The question is whether the learned Judge was right in accepting that view.

Acting on two authorities, Raby v. Ridehalgh (volume 7, De Gex, Macnaghten & Gordon's Reports, page 104) and Chillingworth v. Chambers (1896 volume 1 Chancery Division, page 685), he apparently discerned some principle which he thought entitled him to direct an inquiry whereby Anthony would have to account for the sums which he had received through his mother's account in this way. Before us counsel for the defendants rightly did not attempt to argue that those two cases supported the Judge's view of the law. We do not doubt that if in fact money were paid by direction of the son to his mother's account, or (and it matters not, as we think) to the son's account, and then overnight to the mother's account, upon an understanding that some part of it was to be used to discharge the son's indebtedness to others, he must accept the position that the part so used must be treated as a payment to him. However, the facts fall far short of that in this case, and it was never sought to justify these payments upon any such ground. All that was argued was that as the son had in fact received, albeit indirectly, the benefit of certain of these payments, he should to that extent account for them.

This seems to us not to present any equitable principle of defence in the mouth of a defaulting trustee. In order to escape, the Bank would really have to establish that payment to the mother's account was pro tanto a payment to Anthony. The truth of the matter is that Anthony, under the presumed undue influence of the Commander, was paying very large sums to his mother's account which went to the general family living expenses, some of which he, in a general way, enjoyed as a member of the family, and some of which he enjoyed in a more particular way because it founds its way into his account under arrangements which had nothing to do with the advances. We cannot see how that circumstance entitles a defaulting trustee to any account even if, which we doubt, it would be possible to frame any inquiry which it would be possible to answer.

On this point we allow the appeal and discharge the order for an account.

We summarise our conclusions on the whole matter thus:

(1) As to the claim in respect of the money expended on the purchase of the house in the Isle of Man we agree with the learned Judge, and we dismiss the cross-appeal on this.

(2) As to the sum of £1,000 purported to be expended upon furniture for that house, we disagree with the learned Judge, and we allow the appeal to that extent. This sum must be replaced by the Bank.

(3) As to the £2,600 loan to repay the Hodson settlement, we allow the appeal to this extent, that that sum must be replaced by the Bank but the majority of the court feels that section 61 of the Trustee Act 1925 should relieve the Bank, but only to the extent of the surrender value in 1948 of the policies transferred to Francis and George.

(4) With regard to the £2,000 raised for the alleged purpose of purchasing furniture in the Isle of Man, we agree with the learned Judge and dismiss the appeal.

(5) As to Ann, we think that, notwithstanding her disregard of the truth, the Bank must replace the advances of £3,260 made to her, subject to giving credit for the sum of £300 which was in fact actually expended upon furniture. The appeal is allowed

pro tanto.

(6) We agree with the learned Judge that the Bank must replace the sum of £6,500 advanced to Anthony, but we disagree with the learned Judge that he should have to account for any sums received by her through his mother's account, and we allow the appeal accordingly and dismiss the cross-appeal.

(7) As to the final series of advances aggregating £5,350, we agree with the learned Judge and dismiss the appeal.

The appeal will be restored to the list for argument as to the exact form of order and as to costs on a mutually convenient day when counsel have had an opportunity of considering this Judgment in detail.

LORD JUSTICE WILLMER: The Judgment I am now about to read is my own Judgment on the outstanding point.

I have the misfortune to differ from my brethren as to the degree of relief which ought to be accorded to the Bank under section 61 of the Trustee Act 1925 in respect of their breach of trust regarding what has been described as the Hodson loan transaction. All of us are agreed that in the very special circumstances of this case the Bank should be accorded some relief notwithstanding the fact that they were professional trustees paid for their services. But whereas my brethren think that the Bank should be relieved only in part, I take the view that if relief is to be accorded at all, it should be accorded in full.

I can see no logical reason for stopping short of relief in full. The special circumstance which, in the view of all of us, entitles the Bank to relief is the fact that the solicitor specially appointed by the Bank to give separate advice to, and protect the interests of, Francis and George, failed to ensure that the transaction was carried out in the way which had been advised by Messrs Charles Russell & Co. and agreed to by the boys themselves. The Bank, though clearly in breach of trust, were quite innocent in the matter. They were not the cause of any part of the loss which resulted. Accordingly if, as I think, they are entitled to relief under section 61, they should, in my view, be relieved in full.

I venture to criticise the order proposed by my brethren in relation to this transaction on the ground that, although purporting to grant relief under section 61, it does not in fact result in any relief at all. For even without section 61, I do not see how the Bank could have been made liable for more than the amount of the loss actually sustained through the transaction being carried out as it was. Francis and George in fact received the life policies, the surrender value of which was said to be £650 in 1948. They retained the policies until 1953, by which time they had no doubt increased considerably in value since the payment of premiums was in fact maintained by the mother. The boys then quite voluntarily gave the policies back to their mother, apparently for the purpose of enabling the Commander to raise more money by charging them again. In so far as the boys gave away a tangible asset of value, their loss was due to their own voluntary act, and not to the Bank's original broach of trust. Quite apart from section 61, therefore, I should have thought that in any case the Bank could not have been made liable for the whole of the £2,600, but that credit ought to be given for the surrender value of the policies in 1953.

On the same principle, it has been rightly conceded on behalf of Ann that, in so far as she has herself retained the moneys advanced to her, she cannot claim to recover them again.

If, therefore, as we all agree, relief under section 61 should be accorded, this should, in my view, result in giving the Bank some relief beyond that to which they would in any event have been entitled. For my part, I would relieve the Bank entirely in respect of this £2,600.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN: Lord justice Harman is not able to be here this morning, and asks me to say that he concurs in the Judgment which I am about to deliver.

This Judgment deals only with the question of the liability of the Bank in relation to the Hodson trust.

Lord Justice Willmer has expressed the view that, apart altogether from any relief under section 61 of the Trustee Act 1925, the Bank could not be made liable for more than the amount of the loss actually sustained through the transaction being carried out as it was; and as Francis and George received the life policies, he has held that they must give credit for at least the surrender value of the policies at the date of the transaction. I regret that I am unable to share this view.

The transaction as carried out was a complete breach of trust, and entirely unauthorised by clause 11. Therefore the Bank must replace to the trust funds the £2,600 misapplied.

Test it in this way. Suppose that Francis and George had still the policies, could the Bank, on being ordered to replace £2,600 to the trust, claim that they were only bound to do so on having replaced to them the policies, or at any rate at least upon  receiving credit for the 1948 surrender value of the policies ?  It is, in my judgment, not the law that the plaintiff, rightly  suing for breach of trust, must account for every benefit he may  have incidentally received. What right have the Bank to claim some  set-off from the plain consequences of their breach of trust ?  I can see no possible equity which entitles the Bank to do so. In  fairness to the Bank, let it be said that their counsel never argued  that they had any right (apart from section 61} to claim any such  credit.

On the other hand, of course, as the Judgment of the court  has pointed out, it cannot be doubted that a beneficiary who has  consented to a transaction in breach of trust must be prepared to  accept the consequences and give credit for the money or property  that he has received. That principle, in my judgment, cannot be  applied to the case of the Hodson trust for the very simple reason  that, as the Judgment of the court has declared, Francis and George  never consented to the transaction as it was in fact carried out,  and indeed they were wholly ignorant of it. Therefore, the principle  that they must accept the consequences of a breach of trust to which  they have consented has no application at all, in my judgment, to  these circumstances. The boys received the policies, as they  thought, as part of a larger transaction which would give them  security and a profit on their mother's death. Through the failure  of the legal advisers of the boys and of the Bank, this transaction  was not carried out at all, and it gave them nothing except the  policies. For my part, in those circumstances, I entirely fail to  understand why Francis and George have to give credit for any  property which has passed to them under a transaction of which they  never knew, and never gave their consent. In law the Bank made them a present of the policies.

Lord Justice Willmer has drawn a parallel between this  transaction and the transaction in which Ann conceded that she must  give credit for the moneys advanced to her of which she retained the  benefit. With all respect, I do not follow this. Ann conceded  rightly that she must give credit for the moneys in fact applied for  her benefit for the reason that, as she requested money to be  applied in the purchase of a house and decorations etc., she must  account for the moneys so applied in accordance with her request.  That was in accordance with the general principle I have just stated,  that he or she who has consented to a transaction in breach of  trust must give credit for the benefit he or she has received.  There is no parallel in the Hodson settlement where there was no  such consent, nor any application of money at the boys' request as  the transaction turned out.

Accordingly, for my part I am quite unable to accept the  view that Lord Justice Willmer has expressed that, apart altogether  from section 61, Francis and George would have to account in some  measure for the policies which were in fact transferred into their  names.  In my judgment, therefore, the only question that arises is  whether the Bank should be relieved from the consequences of their  breach of trust under section 61 of the Trustee Act to any, and if  so, what extent. This, I think, is a very difficult question.  The Judgment of the court has already pointed out that the Bank were  personally innocent, but they were ill-advised by their own solicitors;  but the Bank must accept responsibility for such negligence, and  section 61 cannot possibly be invoked to relieve them from its consequences without more. The circumstance that seems to me to make  the application of the section possible is that the Bank received  the letter quoted in the Judgment of the court written by Mr Burrell  on behalf of Francis and George saying that the matter was in a  satisfactory state. Thereafter it would have been quite unreasonable  for the Bank to take any further step to assure themselves that the  transaction had been properly carried out, and they were lulled into a false sense of security. Section 61 is purely discretionary, and  its application necessarily depends on the particular facts of each  case. I think, in the circumstances of this case, that I am prepared  to hold that the Bank acted honestly (that is not in dispute) and  reasonably and ought fairly to be excused to the extent of the  surrender value of the policies transferred to the boys at the date  of the transaction, about £650, but no doubt the exact figure can  be ascertained. I do not see how the Bank can properly be relieved  to any greater extent. The fact that the mother paid the premiums  for a few years, so enhancing the value of the policies, is (so  far as the Bank is concerned) as irrelevant as the fact that, as  was to be expected, in due course the boys gave the policies back  to their mother, and so, of course, to the Commander, thereby  losing all benefit from them.

LORD JUSTICE WILLMER: Mr Bagnall and Mr Home, you have heard that we propose to give you time to consider what we have said before you come and discuss the appropriate form of order. Perhaps you will communicate with the court through the usual channels when you are ready to do so.

Mr BAGNALL: I am obliged to your Lordship.

LORD JUSTICE WILLMER: I should add that when you are ready, it will be necessary to reconstitute the court, so we will appreciate It If you can give as long notice as possible.

Mr BAGNALL: I am grateful to your Lordships for dealing with the matter in that way. I do not know whether your Lordship had it in mind that my learned friend and I, or perhaps our learned juniors, should attempt to agree some minute of order, or whether you think that we should merely study the Judgment and discuss the matter.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN: If you can agree, so much the better .

Mr BAGNALL: I apprehend there would be no difficulty in agreeing a form of order to give effect to the Judgment; but it may well be, of course, that agreement and harmony will disappear on the question of costs.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN: I think that may be safely anticipated!

Mr BAGNALL: But it would perhaps be helpful to everyone if some document were before the court.

LORD JUSTICE WILLMER: Yes, I think it would be most helpful. If you will put your heads together and perhaps reach some measure of agreement, so much the better.

Mr BAGNALL: That will leave the question of costs to be argued, and any further relief for which anyone may be minded to ask.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN: Copies of the main Judgment are available, but my supplemental Judgment is not yet available, but it will be if you apply for it tomorrow or the day after.

Mr BAGNALLs Speaking rather at the moment without fully considering it, my Lord, it may very well be possible to include in the minute of order the part your Lordships have dealt with separately without actually seeing the Judgment. It is quite a short point.

LORD JUSTICE UPJOHN: Yes, probably. The view of the majority of the court, of course, is in the main Judgment.

Mr BAGNALL: If your Lordship pleases.


]
[
REVISED.


THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: This case arises out of a tragic accident which took place on Friday, 12th December, 1958, when two chimney sweeps were overcome by fumes, and died in the basement of the Manchester Assembly Rooms. Their widows bring the action against the occupier, Mr Nathan, claiming that he was at fault and in breach of the duty of care which is now laid down by the Occupiers' Liability Act of 1957.

It is very unfortunate that this case was tried so long after the accident. The action was not commenced until 2½ years after the accident, and not tried till four years after.  In the intervening time the caretaker, a most important witness, had disappeared without trace. So the court, after this length of time, is in great difficulty in ascertaining the facts.

In the Assembly Rooms there was a central heating boiler in which coke was used as a fuel. The boiler had been manufactured in 1929, and was thus nearly thirty years old. There was an old system of flues to carry away the smoke and fumes.  One of these was a horizontal flue 24 ins. in diameter which ran from the boiler for 70 ft. along under the floor. That led into a vertical flue 18 ins. in diameter which went up a chimney 80 ft. in height. In the horizontal flue there was an inspection chamber under a slab in the floor.  In the vertical flue there was a "sweep-hole" about 12 ins. in diameter and 9 ft. above the ground.

It was sometimes very difficult to get this boiler lighted up. The difficulty was to get a draught going along the flues. When it  was first lighted, smoke and fumes got into the atmosphere, which  cleared off when the fire got going well.  In April 1958 some  repairs were carried out, and a firm of builders gave this advice:  "If it smokes, light a fire at the foot of the flue to create a  draught".  In December 1958 the occupier, Mr Nathan, himself was ill  in hospital, and his son-in-law, Mr Corney, was looking after the  Assembly Rooms for him.  On the 9th December 1958 the boiler was to  be got going for the winter. The fire was lit. There was a lot of  smoke. They called in Mr Gardner, a boiler engineer. He said that  the flues needed cleaning. So they called in two chimney sweeps to  sweep the flues. They were the brothers Donald Roles and Joseph  Roles.

Now coke, when burning, gives off carbon monoxide gas, which is very dangerous because it cannot be seen or smelt. It is a  stealthy killer. This should be known to everyone who has anything  to do with boilers.  On the Tuesday, when the sweeps arrived, Mr  Gardner warned them of the danger from the fumes, but they took no  notice. He described how they acted: 

"Donald crawled into the  horizontal flue  I told him he should take care and not go in when  the thing was just open.  Give it a chance to clear out a bit, but  he said he knew; he was a flue cleaner for many years, and he knew  what he was doing. So we do not interfere with people who know  what they are doing". 

The fire was let out, and on the Wednesday  the sweeps cleaned out the flue.  On the Thursday the boiler was  lit up again, but still there was trouble with the fumes and the  smoke.  So they called in an expert, Mr Collingwood. When Mr  Collingwood got there he saw the fumes and smoke, and he gave  another warning; he advised that the fire should be withdrawn at  once. He told everyone to get out of the place altogether and get  some fresh air. The two flue sweeps were not prepared to accept  Mr Collingwood's advice. He described what took place; 

"I ordered  everybody out, and they just jumped into the hole, and that was it.  I went over to them and warned them against this, and I got foul language". 

Mr Collingwood went on to say: 

"I ordered them out and told them the danger of the gas, and the use of it, and they said that they knew a damn sight better; they had been in this business all their life; they did not need my advice". 

He said that he repeated his warning two or three times, and added: 

"They eventually came out, under duress.  I had to more or less drag them out".

After Mr Collingwood had made his inspection, the boiler was lit again. He created a draught by lighting a bit of paper at the bottom of the vertical shaft so as to get it hot. But that was only a temporary expedient. He advised a permanent remedy, either a new flue or an induction fan in the base of the chimney. A new flue would cost a lot of money.  So they decided on an induction fan. This could not be provided at once, so they would have to light it up for a time without the fan. Mr Collingwood then gave another warning which is crucial in this case. He advised the two sweeps, Mr Corney and everyone there that the two vent holes (the inspection chamber and the sweep-hole) were to be sealed up before the boiler was lit up.  

"I repeated this warning", 

he said, 

"quite a few times to everyone that was there, not only the Roles brothers. That was to everyone in the place of the danger of these gases". 

But the attitude of the sweeps, he said, throughout was that they were experts, and they really knew better than Mr Collingwood himself.

It does appear, however, that Mr Collingwood did contemplate the possibility that the boiler might be lit before the holes were sealed up. He said that from his own practical experience he thought that he could seal the holes with the fire on. He thought the sweeps could have done it, but said: 

"It depends entirely how long they were in there.  I myself could have gone in there and sealed them off and come back out again, but I certainly would not have stayed in there any length of time". 

He advised the sweeps, he said, while they were sealing up, not to stay too long in the alcove.

So much for the warnings that were given. On Friday, the 12th December, the fire was lighted. We do not know by whom, but perhaps by the caretaker. The sweeps were working there that day with the fire on. On Friday evening Mr Corney and Mr Gardner went there. The sweeps had very nearly completed their work, but they had not finished sealing up the sweep-hole in the vertical shaft. Mr Corney said: 

"The job was not complete in as much as the cover over the flue hole was not cemented on". 

He asked the sweeps about it. They said they had not enough cement to do it.  It was too late to complete it then, but they would get the necessary cement the following morning from a builder's yard and complete the job. So Mr Corney left thinking they would come back the next morning (the Saturday morning) to finish off the job. The Judge asked him: 

"With the fire still on ?  
(A) I did not think that could have been done with the fire alight.  I was under the impression the fire would be out in the morning when they came back to do the job".

It now turns out that the sweeps must have got their cement that evening, and they must have come back later that night. Maybe the caretaker let them in. They came back and attempted to seal up the sweep-hole with an old dustbin lid and with cement. The fire was on at the time.  Whilst they were doing this, they were overcome by fumes and died. Their bodies were found next morning.  One body was just in the alcove, and the other a little way out, as though he had been trying to pull his workmate out of the alcove. One of them had on his nose a mask of wadding with a nose clip. And so they died. When the police inspected the boiler between 8 and 9 o'clock in the morning, the fire was found to be brightly burning.

It is quite plain that these men died because they were overcome by fumes of carbon monoxide. It would appear to a layman that the fumes must have come from the sweep-hole, but the Judge on the evidence thought they probably came from the boiler. But I do not think it matters. The fumes came from the boiler or the sweep-hole or both.  The question is whether anyone was at fault.

The Judge found Mr Corney guilty of negligence because "he failed to take such care as should have ensured that there was no fire lit until the sweep-hole had been sealed up". He said:

"Unfortunately Mr Corney did not tell the caretaker to draw the fire, or at any rate not to stoke it up". 

On this account he held that Mr Corney was at fault, and the occupier liable. But he found the two sweeps guilty of contributory negligence, and halved the damages.  The Judge said: 

"That negligence"

  that is to say, of the chimney sweeps - 

"consisted in the knowledge that there was gas about, or probably would be, the way they ignored explicit warnings and showed complete indifference to the danger which was pointed out to them in plain language, and this strange indifference to the fact that the fire was alight, when Mr Collingwood had said it ought not to be, until the sweep-hole had been sealed".

The occupier now appeals and says that it is not a case of negligence and contributory negligence, but that, on the true application of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957, the occupier was not liable at all.  This is the first time we have had to consider that Act.  It has been very beneficial.  It has rid us of those two unpleasant characters, the invitee and the licensee, who haunted the courts for years, and it has replaced them by the attractive figure of a visitor, who has so far given no trouble at all. The Act has now been in force six years, and hardly any case has come before the courts in which its interpretation has had to be considered. The draughtsman expressed the hope that "the Act would replace a principle of the common law with a new principle of the common law; instead of having the Judgment of Mr Justice Willes construed as if it were a statute, one is to have a statute which can be construed as if it were a Judgment of Mr Justice Willes".  It seems that his hopes are being fulfilled. All the fine distinctions about traps have been thrown aside and replaced by the common duty of care.

"The common duty of care", 

the Act says, 

"is to take such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the visitor"

 - note the visitor, not the premises - 

"will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purposes for which he is invited or permitted by the occupier to be there". 

That is comprehensive. All the circumstances have to be considered.  But the Act goes on to give examples of the circumstances that are relevant. The particular one in question here is in subsection (3) of section 2: 

"The circumstances relevant for the present purpose include the degree of care, and of want of care, which would ordinarily be looked for in such a visitor, so that (for example) in proper cases ... (b) an occupier may expect that a person, in the exercise of his calling, will appreciate and guard against any special risks ordinarily incident to it, so far as the occupier leaves him free to do so".

That subsection shows that the case of Christmas v. Caledonian Club (1952 volume 1 King's Bench Division, page 141) is still good law under this new Act. There a window cleaner (who was employed by independent contractors) was sent to clean the windows of a club. One of the windows was defective; it had not been inspected and repaired as it should have been. In consequence, when the window cleaner was cleaning it, it ran down quickly and trapped his hand, thus causing him to fall. It was held that he had no cause of action against the club. If it had been a guest who had his fingers trapped by the defective window, the guest could have recovered damages from the club. But the window cleaner could not do so. The reason is this: The householder is concerned to see that the windows are safe for his guests to open and close, but he is not concerned to see that they are safe for a window cleaner to hold on to. The risk of a defective window is a special risk, but it is ordinarily incident to the calling of a window cleaner, and so he must take care for himself, and not expect the householder to do so. Likewise in the case of a chimney sweep who comes to sweep the chimneys or to seal up a sweep-hole. The householder can reasonably expect the sweep to take care of himself so far as any dangers from the flues are concerned. These chimney sweeps ought to have known that there might be dangerous fumes about and ought to have taken steps to guard against them. They ought to have known that they should not attempt to seal up the sweep-hole whilst the fire was still alight. They ought to have had the fire withdrawn before they attempted to seal it up, or at any rate they ought not to have stayed in the alcove too long when there might be dangerous fumes about. All this was known to these two sweeps; they were repeatedly warned about it, and it was for them to guard against the danger. It was not for the occupier to do it, even though he was present and heard the warnings.  When a householder calls in a specialist to deal with a defective installation on his premises, he can reasonably expect the specialist to appreciate and guard against the dangers arising from the defect. The householder is not bound to watch over him to see that he comes to no harm.  I would hold, therefore, that the occupier here was under no duty of care to these sweeps, at any rate in regard to the dangers which caused their deaths. If it had been a different danger, as for instance if the stairs leading to the cellar gave way, the occupier might no doubt be responsible, but not for these dangers which were special risks ordinarily incidental to their calling.

Even if I am wrong about this point, and the occupier was under a duty of care to these chimney sweeps, the question arises whether the duty was discharged by the warning that was given to them.  This bring us to subsection (4) which says: 

"In determining whether the occupier of premises has discharged the common duty of care to a visitor, regard is to be had to all the circumstances, so that (for example) - (a) where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he has been warned by the occupier, the warning is not to be treated without more as absolving the occupier from liability, unless in all the circumstances it was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe".

We all know the reason for this subsection. It was inserted  so as to clear up the unsatisfactory state of the law as it had been  left by the decision of the House of Lords in Horton v. London Graving Dock (1951 Appeal Cases, page 737). That case was commonly  supposed to have decided that, when a person comes on to premises as  an invitee, and is injured by the defective or dangerous condition  of the premises (due to the default of the occupier), it is nevertheless a complete defence for the occupier to prove that the invitee knew of the danger, or had been warned of it. Supposing, for instance, that there was only one way of getting into and out of premises, and it was by a footbridge over a stream which was rotten and dangerous. According to Horton's case, the occupier could escape all liability to any visitor by putting up a notice: "This bridge is dangerous", even though there was no other way by which the visitor could get in or out, and he had no option but to go over the bridge.  In such a case, section 2 subsection (4) makes it clear that the occupier would not be liable.  But if there were two footbridges, one of which was rotten, and the other safe a hundred yards away, the occupier could still escape liability, even today, by putting up a notice: "Do not use this footbridge.  It is dangerous.  There is a safe one further upstream".  Such a warning is sufficient because it does enable the visitor to be reasonably safe.

I think that the law would probably have developed on these lines in any case; see Greene v. Chelsea Borough Council (1954 volume 2 Queen's Bench Division, page 127) where I ventured to say at page 139: 

"Knowledge or notice of the danger is only a defence when the plaintiff is free to act upon that knowledge or notice so as to avoid the danger".  

But the subsection has now made it clear. A warning does not absolve the occupier unless it is enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe.

Apply subsection (4) to this case.  I am quite clear that  the warnings which were given to the sweeps were enough to enable  them to be reasonably safe.  The sweeps would have been quite safe if  they had heeded these warnings. They should not have come back that  evening and attempted to seal up the sweep-hole while the fire was  still alight.  They ought to have waited till next morning, and then  they should have seen that the fire was out before they attempted to seal up the sweep-hole.  In any case they should not have stayed too long in the sweep-hole.  In short, it was entirely their own fault.  The Judge held that it was contributory negligence. I would go further and say that under the Act the occupier has, by the warnings, discharged his duty.

I would therefore be in favour of allowing this appeal and entering Judgment for the defendants.

LORD JUSTICE BARMAN:   The facts of this case remain lamentably obscure, partly because the two chief actors whose acts or defaults have caused the claim to be made by their widows (the plaintiffs) are dead, and. partly because of the disappearance of the caretaker at the relevant time of the building where the tragedy occurred. Moreover, there has been a great delay in starting the action, and the events were over four years old at the time of the trial. This may make it more difficult for the plaintiffs to prove their case, but in my judgement they must accept that disadvantage, which is largely of their own making.

The facts, so far as known, seem to be as follows. The Manchester Assembly Rooms were the property of, and occupied by, the former defendant, Herbert A. Nathan. This building in 1958 was heated by radiators served by a coke boiler in the cellar, itself in use since 1929, but which succeeded an even older one whose flue and the chimney which carried off the smoke and fumes were still in use and ill-adapted to a coke system. There was running from the boiler under the floor of the cellar a long flue which had in it an inspection chamber under a flagstone and went into an upright chimney whose base was in a small alcove on the other side of the cellar.  About 9 ft up this chimney was a circular sweep hole 14 ins in diameter. The upright chimney carried the smoke and by-products 80 ft. up to the open air. The old flue and chimney often gave trouble. The difficulty was to get the fire alight, there being no adequate draught so long as the flue was cold.  This is trouble occured in April 1958, when some repairs were done, and the caretaker was advised to heat the base of the chimney by lighting a fire outside it in a dustbin, thus creating a draught.

In December 1958, when the boiler was relit, there was further trouble. A heating engineering was consulted, who decided that the flue needed cleaning, whereupon the two dead men, who were brothers and chimney sweeps in partnership, were called in. On Tuesday, the 9th December 1958, they removed the flagstone over the inspection chamber, and although the fire was only just out, they ignored the cautions of the heating engineer and entered the flue which one of them declared to be blocked. The sweeps worked on this on Wednesday, the 10th December, and on Thursday the 11th, an attempt to relight the fire was made. Further trouble at once ensued, the cellar being filled with smoke. At this juncture the occupier's agent, one Corney, consulted a person called Collingwood, who was expert in the management of boilers and flues. On arrival he had the fire drawn, and declared the flue to be dangerous because of the gases generated. He ordered everyone out of the cellar. This was a novel doctrine, no danger having been previously suspected, only lighting difficulties. The sweeps became abusive, asserting that they knew better than Collingwood, and one of them actually jumped into the flue. Collingwood insisted on the danger from gas, and even himself removed them from the cellar by force.

When the fire was out and the smoke dispersed, Collingwood got into the flue himself and inspected it, and advised Corney either to have a new flue or an induction fan at the base of the chimney. As a temporary expedient he lit a fire of paper in the base of the chimney, pushing the paper in at the base of the sweep hole which was then uncovered. At this point Collingwood advised the sweeps ( in the presence of Corney and the caretaker ) to seal up both the inspection chamber and the sweep hole before they started the fire going again. He also apparently told them that if the fire was on in the boiler while they were sealing up the sweep hole, they ought not to stay long in the alcove while sealing it up. He said in the witness-box that the sweeps took no notice of his advice and asserted that they knew about the risks better than he did.

On Friday, the 12th December, the fire was apparently relit and burned all day. No one seems to have been inconvenienced. The inspection chamber in the floor was sealed up, but when Mr Corney arrived in the evening to pay the sweeps for their work he found that the sweep hole in the chimney was still open. The sweeps said that they had no cement available to do this job, and Corney arranged with them to return the next morning and finish it by sealing up the hole. He kept back £3 out of their pay to ensure completion. He then left, as did the sweeps, apparently leaving the fire burning. From this point there is no evidence. It seems certain that the sweeps did procure some cement that night and returned to the cellar to complete the job then instead of waiting as arranged till the next morning. There is no evidence whether the caretaker was aware of this activity. The learned Judge thought he was. It seems that the sweeps entered the alcove to cement a cover on the sweep hole while the fire was still burning, and there encountered a concentration of carbon monoxide gas which overpowered and killed them. Their bodies were discovered by the caretaker early the next morning. It appears that the fire was then still burning, and so he must have stoked it in the night. On these facts the widows of the sweeps sue the occupier.

The plaintiffs' case as presented to us in this court rests solely on the fact that on the Friday the fire of the stove was lit by the caretaker ( the occupier's agent ) in the face of Collingwood's advice not to relight it till the two vents were sealed. The Judge held there was a breach of duty for which the occupier was liable, but which was mitigated by the contributory negligence of the sweeps, who knew all the risks as well as the occupier himself. He seems to have thought the plaintiffs' fault to lie not in lighting the fire on Friday, but in a failure to see that it was put out.

The issue in the case depends entirely on the Occupiers' Liability Act of 1957. The sweeps were "visitors" and were therefore owed "the common duty of care". This is defined by Section 2 subsection (2) of the Act in these words: 

"The common duty of care is a duty to take such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the visitor will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purposes for which he is invited or permitted by the occupier to be there". 

Some of the circumstances are stated in subsection (3) (b) in these terms: 

"An occupier may expect that a person, in the exercise of his calling, will appreciate and guard against any special risks ordinarily incident to it, so far as the occupier leaves him free to do so".

Here the "person" is a chimney sweep, and the first question is : Would such a person appreciate and guard against the risk of carbon monoxide gas? I should have thought that this was a special risk ordinarily incident to the trade of sweep. There was no evidence on this point except that of the sweeps themselves, who said they knew all about this kind of risk. Clearly, however, they did not appreciate the degree of risk for they did not guard against it; but I should have thought that the occupier was entitled to take their word and was entitled to expect that they would take sufficient precautions having regard to the emphatic warnings of the occupier's agent, Collingwood, given the previous day. He said that he told them of the risks of these gases more than once. Whether this fact would absolve the occupier from his duty of care, he himself having caused the fire to be lit in the face of Collingwood's advice, may perhaps "be doubtful.

In my judgment the case in the end depends on section 2 subsection (4), which is in these terms: 

"In determining whether the occupier of premises has discharged the common duty of care to a visitor, regard is to be had to all the circumstances, so that ( for example ) - (a) where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he had been warned by the occupier, the warning is not to be treated without more as absolving the occupier from liability, unless in all the circumstances it was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe".

There seems to me no doubt that the sweeps had been warned by the occupier through his agent, Collingwood, of the danger which killed them. That, however, as the section says does not without more absolve the occupier from liability.  The crucial question is whether, in all the circumstances, the warning was "enough to enable the visitors" ( that is, the sweeps )"to be reasonably safe". In my judgment,it was. The occupier did not request or even authorise the sweeps to close the sweep hole while the fire was alight. Mr Corney did not expect the return of the sweeps on Friday night; they told him they were coming back in the morning. He had arranged that they should do the work on Saturday morning. He said also that he anticipated that the fire burning on Friday night would be out by Saturday morning, thus making the work safe. It is true that the caretaker apparently did not let the fire out, and it is said that Corney failed in his duty because he did not expressly order the caretaker to do so, nor did he expressly forbid the sweeps to attempt the work with the fire on. Nevertheless, these sweeps knew as much about the danger as he did. There was no obligation on than to proceed without drawing the fire, they were free to do so, and they deliberately chose to assume the risk notwithstanding the advice given.

In these circumstances, we ought to determine that the occupier did discharge the common duty of care, and in my view the plaintiff widows cannot succeed in their claim

I would allow the appeal. LORD JUSTICE PEARSON: I am sorry to be unable to agree with my brethren in the conclusion that they have reached. I think the difference of opinion is only as to the interpretation of the evidence, and not as to any question of law. The arrangements for the disposing of the smoke and fumes from the boiler fire were at all material times defective. The smoke and fumes had to descend about 2 ft.  4 ins.  from the boiler pipe into the flue, and the flue was too wide ( 24 ins. in diameter ) and too long ( 70 or 80 ft. ) and made of unsuitable material, stoneware, which tends to cause condensation. Consequently there was trouble in what I will call the starting period, that is to say, the period from the moment of lighting the fire until a good fire and a good draught were established. In the starting period the flue and the chimney were not properly warmed up, and the smoke and fumes were not sufficiently drawn along the flue to the chimney, and tended to escape through the boiler itself through any available aperture or leak into the atmosphere of the cellar. The smoke and fumes were likely to contain carbon monoxide gas. There is, however, no evidence of any accident prior to the fatal accident giving rise to these proceedings.

In April 1958 the firm of Mr Sheldon, who gave evidence, were called in to deal with this starting trouble. He said they had trouble with the boiler, mainly in lighting it, on quite a few occasions.  Smoke and fumes escaped into the cellar. Air Sheldon's firm did repairs, and advised that, when the boiler was lit, there should also be a fire made in a dustbin alongside the base of it in order to warm, it up. On the 9th December 1958 there was further trouble. Apparently the boiler was being started, but it was not going well, and there was a lot of smoke because the smoke was not getting away as it should. Mr Gardner, a boiler engineer, was called in, and he advised that the flues should be cleaned. Consequently the two deceased brothers, who were chimney sweeps, were summoned to do the cleaning.   The elder brother, Donald Roles, crawled inside the horizontal flue. Mr Gardner told him that he should take care and not go in when the inspection chamber had just been opened, but Roles replied that he knew, as he had been a flue cleaner for many years, and he knew what he was doing.

The cleaning of the flue did not cure the trouble. Accordingly, another expert, Mr Collingwood, was called in on Thursday, 11th December 1958. He found there was a lot of smoke in the cellar, the fire having been lit. He advised that the fire should be withdrawn, and that was done. He also advised everyone to get out of the premises altogether into the fresh air. The two deceased ignored his advice, and one of them jumped down into the inspection chamber. Mr Collingwood went over to them and warned them against doing that, but they used foul language and told him they knew better; that they had been in the business all their life and did not need advice. Mr Collingwood more or less dragged them into the open air. Mr Collingwood had a discussion with Mr Corney, the son-in-law of the defendant, who was the proprietor of the Assembly Rooms, and advised that a new flue should be put in, or alternatively an induction fan should be provided at the base of the chimney to draw the smoke and fumes along the flue into the chimney.

Now I come to the crux of the case. Mr Collingwood advised that the two access vents which had been opened up - that is to say, the inspection chamber in the middle of the flue and the sweep hole in the side of the chimney -must be sealed, and that this must be done before the boiler fire was lit. That advice was given to "everyone who was there" - certainly, on the evidence, to the two deceased and to Mr Corney. As to the caretaker, he either heard the advice, or he should have had it passed on to him by Mr Corney. There was also advice from Mr Collingwood to the deceased that they were not to stay too long in the alcove while they were sealing up the sweep hole in the chimney. I do not think that meant that he expected them to be sealing up the sweep hole at a time when the boiler fire was burning, as that would be inconsistent with the previous and main advice that the access vents should be sealed before the boiler fire was lit up. It would be wise not to stay too long in the alcove whether or not the fire was burning, as there might be pockets of carbon monoxide lingering in the confined space of the alcove. Mr Collingwood himself lit a temporary fire for testing the movement of the gases. He lit a fire with paper in the bottom of the chimney, and the effect of it was to draw the gases along the flue into the chimney. It may be that for the purposes of this test there was also a fire in the boiler, but if so, it was only temporary.

Despite the advice which had been given by Mr Collingwood, some agent of the defendant ( presumably the caretaker ) on Friday, the 12th December lit the boiler fire, got it started and kept it going, although the access vents, or at any rate one of them, the sweep hole, had not been sealed.

Mr Collingwood had warned the defendant's agent not to do that. There is evidence showing why it was dangerous.

Mr Brierley, another expert, in his deposition at the inquest, which was used as part of his evidence in the action, said this: 

"The fact that the hot gases must decend 2 ft. 4 ins. and travel along 70 ft. of horizontal flue before entering the vertical flue, will result in the draught being difficult to establish and consequently the boiler being difficult to light.  During the early periods of firing, prior to the draught being established adequately, it is inevitable that the products of the combustion will be discharged into the basement at any point of leakage from the boiler, flue or chimney. If carbon monoxide is present in the products of combustion at this stage, lethal concentrations will readily be produced".  

On this occasion there was the added defect of a hole in the chimney. The effect of that must have been to diminish still further the efficiency of the system, and to prolong the starting period in which smoke and fumes were escaping into the atmosphere of the cellar and evidently putting some carbon monoxide into it. A concentration of 4 parts in 1,000 is enough carbon monoxide to be lethal to a human being in about ten minutes. By starting the fire in the boiler before the access vents had been sealed, the defendant's agents were creating that danger unnecessarily for the deceased chimney sweeps who were going to complete the sealing of the access vents.

Mr Corney came to the Assembly Rooms on the afternoon of Friday about 5 to 6 o'clock to pay the sweeps. He retained £3 as they had not completed the work, the cover of the sweep hole not having been cemented on. They said that they had not the necessary cement to complete the job, and it was too late that evening to obtain any, and they would therefore complete it the following morning when the builders' yards were open, and they could get the necessary cement. Mr Corney thought that the boiler fire would have to be put out on Saturday morning for the work on the sweep hole to be done. The boiler fire, however, would have to be lit again on Saturday as the Assembly Rooms were to be used on Saturday evening, and the central heating would need to be in operation.

In the event, the deceased must have found some cement somewhere on Friday evening. They came back to the Assembly Rooms on that evening, presumably with the knowledge of the caretaker, and started to fix with cement the cover of the sweep hole, although the boiler fire was burning; they were overcome with carbon monoxide fumes, and they died. Their bodies were found on the following morning in the alcove.  There was an overturned bucket of cement.  On the face of one of the bodies there was a breathing mask made of cotton wadding fitted on a small clip covering the nostrils and the mouth, and fastened round the head with elastic bands. This mask was probably useless.

The questions to be decided arise under section 2 of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957. Under subsection (2) of the section the occupier has "the common duty of care" to his visitors: that is to say, " a duty to take such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the visitor will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purpose for which he is invited or permitted by the occupier to be there". Prima facie there was a breach of that subsection by the occupier - that is to say, the defendant in this case - because the lighting of the fire before the sealing of the access vents had been completed created a serious and unnecessary danger for the deceased who were lawful visitors, invited to the premises for the purpose of doing this work. The lighting of the fire at that time caused smoke and fumes containing carbon monoxide to enter the air of the cellar , and doubtless to linger in pockets in enclosed places, including the alcove. Clearly on the balance of probabilities this was the cause, or at any rate  a cause, of the fatal accident.

Subsection (3) of section 2 provides, so far as material: 

"The circumstances relevant for the present purpose include the degree of care, and want of care, which would ordinarily be looked for in such a visitor, so that (for example) in proper cases-(b) an occupier may expect that a person, in the exercise of his calling, will appreciate and guard against any special risks ordinarily incident to it, so far as the occupier leaves him free to do so". 

In my view, "such a visitor" means a visitor of the relevant class, in this case chimney sweeps. The defendant, as occupier, was entitled to expect that the deceased, in the exercise of their calling as chimney sweeps, would to some extent appreciate and guard against the carbon monoxide risk. In fact it appears that they did have some appreciation of the risk, and tried to guard against it because the face mask was used. But in my view, the actual risk in this case resulting from the use of a defective installation, when it had a serious additional defect, was not "ordinarily incident" to the sweeps' calling. It was an extra-ordinary risk, as Mr Collingwood's vigorous actions and emphatic warnings on Monday, the 11th December, sufficiently show. Sweeps are not expert chemists or engineers, and it would be wrong to attribute to them a high  degree of expert knowledge. Moreover, the defendant, as occupier, had not left the deceased free to guard against the risk adequately, if I have correctly understood the true nature of the risk. As I understand the evidence of Mr Brierley ( which the learned Judge appears to have accepted ) the risk did not consist of doing the work on the sweep hole cover while the boiler fire was burning well. At such a time the chimney would be hot, and would be duly drawing the smoke and fumes from the boiler along the flue into and up the chimney; and at the sweep hole there would be an intake of air into the chimney and not an output of smoke and fumes from the chimney into the alcove.

The risk arose, so to speak, from an event of past history. The boiler had been lit, and the dangerous starting period had elapsed, at a time when the defective installation was rendered still more defective by the hole in the chimney, and the fatal accident shows that carbon monoxide had been left behind in the alcove. The deceased could not adequately guard against that risk. It can only be said that they would have had a better chance if they had postponed the completion of the work until Saturday morning because there would by then have been more time for the lingering pockets of carbon monoxide to disperse. The fire could have been put out on Saturday morning, but there is no evidence that that would in itself have removed the carbon monoxide from the alcove. In my view, therefore, the widows' claims are not defeated by section 2 subsection (3) (b) of the Act.

The opening words of subsection (4), of which paragraph (a) is material, read as follows : 

"In determining whether the occupier of premises has discharged the common duty of care to a visitor, regard is to be had to all the circumstances, so that ( for example ) - (a) where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he has been warned by the occupier, the warning is not to be treated without more as absolving the occupier from liability, unless in all the circumstances it was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe".

Substantially the same facts provide the plaintiff with their answer to the defendants argument under this subsection. The deceased received adequate warning from Mr Collingwood, and if the defendants agents had heeded the warning, the warning would have enabled the deceased to be reasonably safe. But the defendant's agents themselves, in disregard of the warning, did the dangerous act of lighting the fire before the access vents had been sealed.  That created the concentration of carbon monxide in the alcove. That was something done by the defendant's agents, and it could not be undone by the deceased, however much they heeded Mr Collingwood's warning. In these circumstances, the warning did not enable the deceased to be reasonably safe; and in my view, therefore, this paragraph of the subsection. does not defeat the widows' claim.

Accordingly, I agree with the learned Judge's decision on the liability of the defendant, and do not have to consider his decision as to contributory negligence because that is not disputed.

I would have dismissed the appeal, but that is a minority view, and of course, the majority view of my bretheren will prevail, so that the appeal will be allowed.

ORDER: Appeal allowed.

Judgment below set aside and in lieu thereof Judgment entered for Defendants. No order for costs.
Leave to appeal to House of Lords refused Plaintiffs' costs to be taxed under Third Schedule to Legal Aid and Advice Act, 1949.


]
[
REVISED.


THE MASTER OF THE ROLLS: This case arises out of a tragic accident which took place on Friday, 12th December, 1958, when two chimney sweeps were overcome by fumes, and died in the basement of the Manchester Assembly Rooms. Their widows bring the action against the occupier, Mr Nathan, claiming that he was at fault and in breach of the duty of care which is now laid down by the Occupiers' Liability Act of 1957.

It is very unfortunate that this case was tried so long after the accident. The action was not commenced until 2½ years after the accident, and not tried till four years after.  In the intervening time the caretaker, a most important witness, had disappeared without trace. So the court, after this length of time, is in great difficulty in ascertaining the facts.

In the Assembly Rooms there was a central heating boiler in which coke was used as a fuel. The boiler had been manufactured in 1929, and was thus nearly thirty years old. There was an old system of flues to carry away the smoke and fumes.  One of these was a horizontal flue 24 ins. in diameter which ran from the boiler for 70 ft. along under the floor. That led into a vertical flue 18 ins. in diameter which went up a chimney 80 ft. in height. In the horizontal flue there was an inspection chamber under a slab in the floor.  In the vertical flue there was a "sweep-hole" about 12 ins. in diameter and 9 ft. above the ground.

It was sometimes very difficult to get this boiler lighted up. The difficulty was to get a draught going along the flues. When it  was first lighted, smoke and fumes got into the atmosphere, which  cleared off when the fire got going well.  In April 1958 some  repairs were carried out, and a firm of builders gave this advice:  "If it smokes, light a fire at the foot of the flue to create a  draught".  In December 1958 the occupier, Mr Nathan, himself was ill  in hospital, and his son-in-law, Mr Corney, was looking after the  Assembly Rooms for him.  On the 9th December 1958 the boiler was to  be got going for the winter. The fire was lit. There was a lot of  smoke. They called in Mr Gardner, a boiler engineer. He said that  the flues needed cleaning. So they called in two chimney sweeps to  sweep the flues. They were the brothers Donald Roles and Joseph  Roles.

Now coke, when burning, gives off carbon monoxide gas, which is very dangerous because it cannot be seen or smelt. It is a  stealthy killer. This should be known to everyone who has anything  to do with boilers.  On the Tuesday, when the sweeps arrived, Mr  Gardner warned them of the danger from the fumes, but they took no  notice. He described how they acted: 

"Donald crawled into the  horizontal flue  I told him he should take care and not go in when  the thing was just open.  Give it a chance to clear out a bit, but  he said he knew; he was a flue cleaner for many years, and he knew  what he was doing. So we do not interfere with people who know  what they are doing". 

The fire was let out, and on the Wednesday  the sweeps cleaned out the flue.  On the Thursday the boiler was  lit up again, but still there was trouble with the fumes and the  smoke.  So they called in an expert, Mr Collingwood. When Mr  Collingwood got there he saw the fumes and smoke, and he gave  another warning; he advised that the fire should be withdrawn at  once. He told everyone to get out of the place altogether and get  some fresh air. The two flue sweeps were not prepared to accept  Mr Collingwood's advice. He described what took place; 

"I ordered  everybody out, and they just jumped into the hole, and that was it.  I went over to them and warned them against this, and I got foul language". 

Mr Collingwood went on to say: 

"I ordered them out and told them the danger of the gas, and the use of it, and they said that they knew a damn sight better; they had been in this business all their life; they did not need my advice". 

He said that he repeated his warning two or three times, and added: 

"They eventually came out, under duress.  I had to more or less drag them out".

After Mr Collingwood had made his inspection, the boiler was lit again. He created a draught by lighting a bit of paper at the bottom of the vertical shaft so as to get it hot. But that was only a temporary expedient. He advised a permanent remedy, either a new flue or an induction fan in the base of the chimney. A new flue would cost a lot of money.  So they decided on an induction fan. This could not be provided at once, so they would have to light it up for a time without the fan. Mr Collingwood then gave another warning which is crucial in this case. He advised the two sweeps, Mr Corney and everyone there that the two vent holes (the inspection chamber and the sweep-hole) were to be sealed up before the boiler was lit up.  

"I repeated this warning", 

he said, 

"quite a few times to everyone that was there, not only the Roles brothers. That was to everyone in the place of the danger of these gases". 

But the attitude of the sweeps, he said, throughout was that they were experts, and they really knew better than Mr Collingwood himself.

It does appear, however, that Mr Collingwood did contemplate the possibility that the boiler might be lit before the holes were sealed up. He said that from his own practical experience he thought that he could seal the holes with the fire on. He thought the sweeps could have done it, but said: 

"It depends entirely how long they were in there.  I myself could have gone in there and sealed them off and come back out again, but I certainly would not have stayed in there any length of time". 

He advised the sweeps, he said, while they were sealing up, not to stay too long in the alcove.

So much for the warnings that were given. On Friday, the 12th December, the fire was lighted. We do not know by whom, but perhaps by the caretaker. The sweeps were working there that day with the fire on. On Friday evening Mr Corney and Mr Gardner went there. The sweeps had very nearly completed their work, but they had not finished sealing up the sweep-hole in the vertical shaft. Mr Corney said: 

"The job was not complete in as much as the cover over the flue hole was not cemented on". 

He asked the sweeps about it. They said they had not enough cement to do it.  It was too late to complete it then, but they would get the necessary cement the following morning from a builder's yard and complete the job. So Mr Corney left thinking they would come back the next morning (the Saturday morning) to finish off the job. The Judge asked him: 

"With the fire still on ?  
(A) I did not think that could have been done with the fire alight.  I was under the impression the fire would be out in the morning when they came back to do the job".

It now turns out that the sweeps must have got their cement that evening, and they must have come back later that night. Maybe the caretaker let them in. They came back and attempted to seal up the sweep-hole with an old dustbin lid and with cement. The fire was on at the time.  Whilst they were doing this, they were overcome by fumes and died. Their bodies were found next morning.  One body was just in the alcove, and the other a little way out, as though he had been trying to pull his workmate out of the alcove. One of them had on his nose a mask of wadding with a nose clip. And so they died. When the police inspected the boiler between 8 and 9 o'clock in the morning, the fire was found to be brightly burning.

It is quite plain that these men died because they were overcome by fumes of carbon monoxide. It would appear to a layman that the fumes must have come from the sweep-hole, but the Judge on the evidence thought they probably came from the boiler. But I do not think it matters. The fumes came from the boiler or the sweep-hole or both.  The question is whether anyone was at fault.

The Judge found Mr Corney guilty of negligence because "he failed to take such care as should have ensured that there was no fire lit until the sweep-hole had been sealed up". He said:

"Unfortunately Mr Corney did not tell the caretaker to draw the fire, or at any rate not to stoke it up". 

On this account he held that Mr Corney was at fault, and the occupier liable. But he found the two sweeps guilty of contributory negligence, and halved the damages.  The Judge said: 

"That negligence"

  that is to say, of the chimney sweeps - 

"consisted in the knowledge that there was gas about, or probably would be, the way they ignored explicit warnings and showed complete indifference to the danger which was pointed out to them in plain language, and this strange indifference to the fact that the fire was alight, when Mr Collingwood had said it ought not to be, until the sweep-hole had been sealed".

The occupier now appeals and says that it is not a case of negligence and contributory negligence, but that, on the true application of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957, the occupier was not liable at all.  This is the first time we have had to consider that Act.  It has been very beneficial.  It has rid us of those two unpleasant characters, the invitee and the licensee, who haunted the courts for years, and it has replaced them by the attractive figure of a visitor, who has so far given no trouble at all. The Act has now been in force six years, and hardly any case has come before the courts in which its interpretation has had to be considered. The draughtsman expressed the hope that "the Act would replace a principle of the common law with a new principle of the common law; instead of having the Judgment of Mr Justice Willes construed as if it were a statute, one is to have a statute which can be construed as if it were a Judgment of Mr Justice Willes".  It seems that his hopes are being fulfilled. All the fine distinctions about traps have been thrown aside and replaced by the common duty of care.

"The common duty of care", 

the Act says, 

"is to take such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the visitor"

 - note the visitor, not the premises - 

"will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purposes for which he is invited or permitted by the occupier to be there". 

That is comprehensive. All the circumstances have to be considered.  But the Act goes on to give examples of the circumstances that are relevant. The particular one in question here is in subsection (3) of section 2: 

"The circumstances relevant for the present purpose include the degree of care, and of want of care, which would ordinarily be looked for in such a visitor, so that (for example) in proper cases ... (b) an occupier may expect that a person, in the exercise of his calling, will appreciate and guard against any special risks ordinarily incident to it, so far as the occupier leaves him free to do so".

That subsection shows that the case of Christmas v. Caledonian Club (1952 volume 1 King's Bench Division, page 141) is still good law under this new Act. There a window cleaner (who was employed by independent contractors) was sent to clean the windows of a club. One of the windows was defective; it had not been inspected and repaired as it should have been. In consequence, when the window cleaner was cleaning it, it ran down quickly and trapped his hand, thus causing him to fall. It was held that he had no cause of action against the club. If it had been a guest who had his fingers trapped by the defective window, the guest could have recovered damages from the club. But the window cleaner could not do so. The reason is this: The householder is concerned to see that the windows are safe for his guests to open and close, but he is not concerned to see that they are safe for a window cleaner to hold on to. The risk of a defective window is a special risk, but it is ordinarily incident to the calling of a window cleaner, and so he must take care for himself, and not expect the householder to do so. Likewise in the case of a chimney sweep who comes to sweep the chimneys or to seal up a sweep-hole. The householder can reasonably expect the sweep to take care of himself so far as any dangers from the flues are concerned. These chimney sweeps ought to have known that there might be dangerous fumes about and ought to have taken steps to guard against them. They ought to have known that they should not attempt to seal up the sweep-hole whilst the fire was still alight. They ought to have had the fire withdrawn before they attempted to seal it up, or at any rate they ought not to have stayed in the alcove too long when there might be dangerous fumes about. All this was known to these two sweeps; they were repeatedly warned about it, and it was for them to guard against the danger. It was not for the occupier to do it, even though he was present and heard the warnings.  When a householder calls in a specialist to deal with a defective installation on his premises, he can reasonably expect the specialist to appreciate and guard against the dangers arising from the defect. The householder is not bound to watch over him to see that he comes to no harm.  I would hold, therefore, that the occupier here was under no duty of care to these sweeps, at any rate in regard to the dangers which caused their deaths. If it had been a different danger, as for instance if the stairs leading to the cellar gave way, the occupier might no doubt be responsible, but not for these dangers which were special risks ordinarily incidental to their calling.

Even if I am wrong about this point, and the occupier was under a duty of care to these chimney sweeps, the question arises whether the duty was discharged by the warning that was given to them.  This bring us to subsection (4) which says: 

"In determining whether the occupier of premises has discharged the common duty of care to a visitor, regard is to be had to all the circumstances, so that (for example) - (a) where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he has been warned by the occupier, the warning is not to be treated without more as absolving the occupier from liability, unless in all the circumstances it was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe".

We all know the reason for this subsection. It was inserted  so as to clear up the unsatisfactory state of the law as it had been  left by the decision of the House of Lords in Horton v. London Graving Dock (1951 Appeal Cases, page 737). That case was commonly  supposed to have decided that, when a person comes on to premises as  an invitee, and is injured by the defective or dangerous condition  of the premises (due to the default of the occupier), it is nevertheless a complete defence for the occupier to prove that the invitee knew of the danger, or had been warned of it. Supposing, for instance, that there was only one way of getting into and out of premises, and it was by a footbridge over a stream which was rotten and dangerous. According to Horton's case, the occupier could escape all liability to any visitor by putting up a notice: "This bridge is dangerous", even though there was no other way by which the visitor could get in or out, and he had no option but to go over the bridge.  In such a case, section 2 subsection (4) makes it clear that the occupier would not be liable.  But if there were two footbridges, one of which was rotten, and the other safe a hundred yards away, the occupier could still escape liability, even today, by putting up a notice: "Do not use this footbridge.  It is dangerous.  There is a safe one further upstream".  Such a warning is sufficient because it does enable the visitor to be reasonably safe.

I think that the law would probably have developed on these lines in any case; see Greene v. Chelsea Borough Council (1954 volume 2 Queen's Bench Division, page 127) where I ventured to say at page 139: 

"Knowledge or notice of the danger is only a defence when the plaintiff is free to act upon that knowledge or notice so as to avoid the danger".  

But the subsection has now made it clear. A warning does not absolve the occupier unless it is enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe.

Apply subsection (4) to this case.  I am quite clear that  the warnings which were given to the sweeps were enough to enable  them to be reasonably safe.  The sweeps would have been quite safe if  they had heeded these warnings. They should not have come back that  evening and attempted to seal up the sweep-hole while the fire was  still alight.  They ought to have waited till next morning, and then  they should have seen that the fire was out before they attempted to seal up the sweep-hole.  In any case they should not have stayed too long in the sweep-hole.  In short, it was entirely their own fault.  The Judge held that it was contributory negligence. I would go further and say that under the Act the occupier has, by the warnings, discharged his duty.

I would therefore be in favour of allowing this appeal and entering Judgment for the defendants.

LORD JUSTICE BARMAN:   The facts of this case remain lamentably obscure, partly because the two chief actors whose acts or defaults have caused the claim to be made by their widows (the plaintiffs) are dead, and. partly because of the disappearance of the caretaker at the relevant time of the building where the tragedy occurred. Moreover, there has been a great delay in starting the action, and the events were over four years old at the time of the trial. This may make it more difficult for the plaintiffs to prove their case, but in my judgement they must accept that disadvantage, which is largely of their own making.

The facts, so far as known, seem to be as follows. The Manchester Assembly Rooms were the property of, and occupied by, the former defendant, Herbert A. Nathan. This building in 1958 was heated by radiators served by a coke boiler in the cellar, itself in use since 1929, but which succeeded an even older one whose flue and the chimney which carried off the smoke and fumes were still in use and ill-adapted to a coke system. There was running from the boiler under the floor of the cellar a long flue which had in it an inspection chamber under a flagstone and went into an upright chimney whose base was in a small alcove on the other side of the cellar.  About 9 ft up this chimney was a circular sweep hole 14 ins in diameter. The upright chimney carried the smoke and by-products 80 ft. up to the open air. The old flue and chimney often gave trouble. The difficulty was to get the fire alight, there being no adequate draught so long as the flue was cold.  This is trouble occured in April 1958, when some repairs were done, and the caretaker was advised to heat the base of the chimney by lighting a fire outside it in a dustbin, thus creating a draught.

In December 1958, when the boiler was relit, there was further trouble. A heating engineering was consulted, who decided that the flue needed cleaning, whereupon the two dead men, who were brothers and chimney sweeps in partnership, were called in. On Tuesday, the 9th December 1958, they removed the flagstone over the inspection chamber, and although the fire was only just out, they ignored the cautions of the heating engineer and entered the flue which one of them declared to be blocked. The sweeps worked on this on Wednesday, the 10th December, and on Thursday the 11th, an attempt to relight the fire was made. Further trouble at once ensued, the cellar being filled with smoke. At this juncture the occupier's agent, one Corney, consulted a person called Collingwood, who was expert in the management of boilers and flues. On arrival he had the fire drawn, and declared the flue to be dangerous because of the gases generated. He ordered everyone out of the cellar. This was a novel doctrine, no danger having been previously suspected, only lighting difficulties. The sweeps became abusive, asserting that they knew better than Collingwood, and one of them actually jumped into the flue. Collingwood insisted on the danger from gas, and even himself removed them from the cellar by force.

When the fire was out and the smoke dispersed, Collingwood got into the flue himself and inspected it, and advised Corney either to have a new flue or an induction fan at the base of the chimney. As a temporary expedient he lit a fire of paper in the base of the chimney, pushing the paper in at the base of the sweep hole which was then uncovered. At this point Collingwood advised the sweeps ( in the presence of Corney and the caretaker ) to seal up both the inspection chamber and the sweep hole before they started the fire going again. He also apparently told them that if the fire was on in the boiler while they were sealing up the sweep hole, they ought not to stay long in the alcove while sealing it up. He said in the witness-box that the sweeps took no notice of his advice and asserted that they knew about the risks better than he did.

On Friday, the 12th December, the fire was apparently relit and burned all day. No one seems to have been inconvenienced. The inspection chamber in the floor was sealed up, but when Mr Corney arrived in the evening to pay the sweeps for their work he found that the sweep hole in the chimney was still open. The sweeps said that they had no cement available to do this job, and Corney arranged with them to return the next morning and finish it by sealing up the hole. He kept back £3 out of their pay to ensure completion. He then left, as did the sweeps, apparently leaving the fire burning. From this point there is no evidence. It seems certain that the sweeps did procure some cement that night and returned to the cellar to complete the job then instead of waiting as arranged till the next morning. There is no evidence whether the caretaker was aware of this activity. The learned Judge thought he was. It seems that the sweeps entered the alcove to cement a cover on the sweep hole while the fire was still burning, and there encountered a concentration of carbon monoxide gas which overpowered and killed them. Their bodies were discovered by the caretaker early the next morning. It appears that the fire was then still burning, and so he must have stoked it in the night. On these facts the widows of the sweeps sue the occupier.

The plaintiffs' case as presented to us in this court rests solely on the fact that on the Friday the fire of the stove was lit by the caretaker ( the occupier's agent ) in the face of Collingwood's advice not to relight it till the two vents were sealed. The Judge held there was a breach of duty for which the occupier was liable, but which was mitigated by the contributory negligence of the sweeps, who knew all the risks as well as the occupier himself. He seems to have thought the plaintiffs' fault to lie not in lighting the fire on Friday, but in a failure to see that it was put out.

The issue in the case depends entirely on the Occupiers' Liability Act of 1957. The sweeps were "visitors" and were therefore owed "the common duty of care". This is defined by Section 2 subsection (2) of the Act in these words: 

"The common duty of care is a duty to take such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the visitor will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purposes for which he is invited or permitted by the occupier to be there". 

Some of the circumstances are stated in subsection (3) (b) in these terms: 

"An occupier may expect that a person, in the exercise of his calling, will appreciate and guard against any special risks ordinarily incident to it, so far as the occupier leaves him free to do so".

Here the "person" is a chimney sweep, and the first question is : Would such a person appreciate and guard against the risk of carbon monoxide gas? I should have thought that this was a special risk ordinarily incident to the trade of sweep. There was no evidence on this point except that of the sweeps themselves, who said they knew all about this kind of risk. Clearly, however, they did not appreciate the degree of risk for they did not guard against it; but I should have thought that the occupier was entitled to take their word and was entitled to expect that they would take sufficient precautions having regard to the emphatic warnings of the occupier's agent, Collingwood, given the previous day. He said that he told them of the risks of these gases more than once. Whether this fact would absolve the occupier from his duty of care, he himself having caused the fire to be lit in the face of Collingwood's advice, may perhaps "be doubtful.

In my judgment the case in the end depends on section 2 subsection (4), which is in these terms: 

"In determining whether the occupier of premises has discharged the common duty of care to a visitor, regard is to be had to all the circumstances, so that ( for example ) - (a) where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he had been warned by the occupier, the warning is not to be treated without more as absolving the occupier from liability, unless in all the circumstances it was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe".

There seems to me no doubt that the sweeps had been warned by the occupier through his agent, Collingwood, of the danger which killed them. That, however, as the section says does not without more absolve the occupier from liability.  The crucial question is whether, in all the circumstances, the warning was "enough to enable the visitors" ( that is, the sweeps )"to be reasonably safe". In my judgment,it was. The occupier did not request or even authorise the sweeps to close the sweep hole while the fire was alight. Mr Corney did not expect the return of the sweeps on Friday night; they told him they were coming back in the morning. He had arranged that they should do the work on Saturday morning. He said also that he anticipated that the fire burning on Friday night would be out by Saturday morning, thus making the work safe. It is true that the caretaker apparently did not let the fire out, and it is said that Corney failed in his duty because he did not expressly order the caretaker to do so, nor did he expressly forbid the sweeps to attempt the work with the fire on. Nevertheless, these sweeps knew as much about the danger as he did. There was no obligation on than to proceed without drawing the fire, they were free to do so, and they deliberately chose to assume the risk notwithstanding the advice given.

In these circumstances, we ought to determine that the occupier did discharge the common duty of care, and in my view the plaintiff widows cannot succeed in their claim

I would allow the appeal. LORD JUSTICE PEARSON: I am sorry to be unable to agree with my brethren in the conclusion that they have reached. I think the difference of opinion is only as to the interpretation of the evidence, and not as to any question of law. The arrangements for the disposing of the smoke and fumes from the boiler fire were at all material times defective. The smoke and fumes had to descend about 2 ft.  4 ins.  from the boiler pipe into the flue, and the flue was too wide ( 24 ins. in diameter ) and too long ( 70 or 80 ft. ) and made of unsuitable material, stoneware, which tends to cause condensation. Consequently there was trouble in what I will call the starting period, that is to say, the period from the moment of lighting the fire until a good fire and a good draught were established. In the starting period the flue and the chimney were not properly warmed up, and the smoke and fumes were not sufficiently drawn along the flue to the chimney, and tended to escape through the boiler itself through any available aperture or leak into the atmosphere of the cellar. The smoke and fumes were likely to contain carbon monoxide gas. There is, however, no evidence of any accident prior to the fatal accident giving rise to these proceedings.

In April 1958 the firm of Mr Sheldon, who gave evidence, were called in to deal with this starting trouble. He said they had trouble with the boiler, mainly in lighting it, on quite a few occasions.  Smoke and fumes escaped into the cellar. Air Sheldon's firm did repairs, and advised that, when the boiler was lit, there should also be a fire made in a dustbin alongside the base of it in order to warm, it up. On the 9th December 1958 there was further trouble. Apparently the boiler was being started, but it was not going well, and there was a lot of smoke because the smoke was not getting away as it should. Mr Gardner, a boiler engineer, was called in, and he advised that the flues should be cleaned. Consequently the two deceased brothers, who were chimney sweeps, were summoned to do the cleaning.   The elder brother, Donald Roles, crawled inside the horizontal flue. Mr Gardner told him that he should take care and not go in when the inspection chamber had just been opened, but Roles replied that he knew, as he had been a flue cleaner for many years, and he knew what he was doing.

The cleaning of the flue did not cure the trouble. Accordingly, another expert, Mr Collingwood, was called in on Thursday, 11th December 1958. He found there was a lot of smoke in the cellar, the fire having been lit. He advised that the fire should be withdrawn, and that was done. He also advised everyone to get out of the premises altogether into the fresh air. The two deceased ignored his advice, and one of them jumped down into the inspection chamber. Mr Collingwood went over to them and warned them against doing that, but they used foul language and told him they knew better; that they had been in the business all their life and did not need advice. Mr Collingwood more or less dragged them into the open air. Mr Collingwood had a discussion with Mr Corney, the son-in-law of the defendant, who was the proprietor of the Assembly Rooms, and advised that a new flue should be put in, or alternatively an induction fan should be provided at the base of the chimney to draw the smoke and fumes along the flue into the chimney.

Now I come to the crux of the case. Mr Collingwood advised that the two access vents which had been opened up - that is to say, the inspection chamber in the middle of the flue and the sweep hole in the side of the chimney -must be sealed, and that this must be done before the boiler fire was lit. That advice was given to "everyone who was there" - certainly, on the evidence, to the two deceased and to Mr Corney. As to the caretaker, he either heard the advice, or he should have had it passed on to him by Mr Corney. There was also advice from Mr Collingwood to the deceased that they were not to stay too long in the alcove while they were sealing up the sweep hole in the chimney. I do not think that meant that he expected them to be sealing up the sweep hole at a time when the boiler fire was burning, as that would be inconsistent with the previous and main advice that the access vents should be sealed before the boiler fire was lit up. It would be wise not to stay too long in the alcove whether or not the fire was burning, as there might be pockets of carbon monoxide lingering in the confined space of the alcove. Mr Collingwood himself lit a temporary fire for testing the movement of the gases. He lit a fire with paper in the bottom of the chimney, and the effect of it was to draw the gases along the flue into the chimney. It may be that for the purposes of this test there was also a fire in the boiler, but if so, it was only temporary.

Despite the advice which had been given by Mr Collingwood, some agent of the defendant ( presumably the caretaker ) on Friday, the 12th December lit the boiler fire, got it started and kept it going, although the access vents, or at any rate one of them, the sweep hole, had not been sealed.

Mr Collingwood had warned the defendant's agent not to do that. There is evidence showing why it was dangerous.

Mr Brierley, another expert, in his deposition at the inquest, which was used as part of his evidence in the action, said this: 

"The fact that the hot gases must decend 2 ft. 4 ins. and travel along 70 ft. of horizontal flue before entering the vertical flue, will result in the draught being difficult to establish and consequently the boiler being difficult to light.  During the early periods of firing, prior to the draught being established adequately, it is inevitable that the products of the combustion will be discharged into the basement at any point of leakage from the boiler, flue or chimney. If carbon monoxide is present in the products of combustion at this stage, lethal concentrations will readily be produced".  

On this occasion there was the added defect of a hole in the chimney. The effect of that must have been to diminish still further the efficiency of the system, and to prolong the starting period in which smoke and fumes were escaping into the atmosphere of the cellar and evidently putting some carbon monoxide into it. A concentration of 4 parts in 1,000 is enough carbon monoxide to be lethal to a human being in about ten minutes. By starting the fire in the boiler before the access vents had been sealed, the defendant's agents were creating that danger unnecessarily for the deceased chimney sweeps who were going to complete the sealing of the access vents.

Mr Corney came to the Assembly Rooms on the afternoon of Friday about 5 to 6 o'clock to pay the sweeps. He retained £3 as they had not completed the work, the cover of the sweep hole not having been cemented on. They said that they had not the necessary cement to complete the job, and it was too late that evening to obtain any, and they would therefore complete it the following morning when the builders' yards were open, and they could get the necessary cement. Mr Corney thought that the boiler fire would have to be put out on Saturday morning for the work on the sweep hole to be done. The boiler fire, however, would have to be lit again on Saturday as the Assembly Rooms were to be used on Saturday evening, and the central heating would need to be in operation.

In the event, the deceased must have found some cement somewhere on Friday evening. They came back to the Assembly Rooms on that evening, presumably with the knowledge of the caretaker, and started to fix with cement the cover of the sweep hole, although the boiler fire was burning; they were overcome with carbon monoxide fumes, and they died. Their bodies were found on the following morning in the alcove.  There was an overturned bucket of cement.  On the face of one of the bodies there was a breathing mask made of cotton wadding fitted on a small clip covering the nostrils and the mouth, and fastened round the head with elastic bands. This mask was probably useless.

The questions to be decided arise under section 2 of the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957. Under subsection (2) of the section the occupier has "the common duty of care" to his visitors: that is to say, " a duty to take such care as in all the circumstances of the case is reasonable to see that the visitor will be reasonably safe in using the premises for the purpose for which he is invited or permitted by the occupier to be there". Prima facie there was a breach of that subsection by the occupier - that is to say, the defendant in this case - because the lighting of the fire before the sealing of the access vents had been completed created a serious and unnecessary danger for the deceased who were lawful visitors, invited to the premises for the purpose of doing this work. The lighting of the fire at that time caused smoke and fumes containing carbon monoxide to enter the air of the cellar , and doubtless to linger in pockets in enclosed places, including the alcove. Clearly on the balance of probabilities this was the cause, or at any rate  a cause, of the fatal accident.

Subsection (3) of section 2 provides, so far as material: 

"The circumstances relevant for the present purpose include the degree of care, and want of care, which would ordinarily be looked for in such a visitor, so that (for example) in proper cases-(b) an occupier may expect that a person, in the exercise of his calling, will appreciate and guard against any special risks ordinarily incident to it, so far as the occupier leaves him free to do so". 

In my view, "such a visitor" means a visitor of the relevant class, in this case chimney sweeps. The defendant, as occupier, was entitled to expect that the deceased, in the exercise of their calling as chimney sweeps, would to some extent appreciate and guard against the carbon monoxide risk. In fact it appears that they did have some appreciation of the risk, and tried to guard against it because the face mask was used. But in my view, the actual risk in this case resulting from the use of a defective installation, when it had a serious additional defect, was not "ordinarily incident" to the sweeps' calling. It was an extra-ordinary risk, as Mr Collingwood's vigorous actions and emphatic warnings on Monday, the 11th December, sufficiently show. Sweeps are not expert chemists or engineers, and it would be wrong to attribute to them a high  degree of expert knowledge. Moreover, the defendant, as occupier, had not left the deceased free to guard against the risk adequately, if I have correctly understood the true nature of the risk. As I understand the evidence of Mr Brierley ( which the learned Judge appears to have accepted ) the risk did not consist of doing the work on the sweep hole cover while the boiler fire was burning well. At such a time the chimney would be hot, and would be duly drawing the smoke and fumes from the boiler along the flue into and up the chimney; and at the sweep hole there would be an intake of air into the chimney and not an output of smoke and fumes from the chimney into the alcove.

The risk arose, so to speak, from an event of past history. The boiler had been lit, and the dangerous starting period had elapsed, at a time when the defective installation was rendered still more defective by the hole in the chimney, and the fatal accident shows that carbon monoxide had been left behind in the alcove. The deceased could not adequately guard against that risk. It can only be said that they would have had a better chance if they had postponed the completion of the work until Saturday morning because there would by then have been more time for the lingering pockets of carbon monoxide to disperse. The fire could have been put out on Saturday morning, but there is no evidence that that would in itself have removed the carbon monoxide from the alcove. In my view, therefore, the widows' claims are not defeated by section 2 subsection (3) (b) of the Act.

The opening words of subsection (4), of which paragraph (a) is material, read as follows : 

"In determining whether the occupier of premises has discharged the common duty of care to a visitor, regard is to be had to all the circumstances, so that ( for example ) - (a) where damage is caused to a visitor by a danger of which he has been warned by the occupier, the warning is not to be treated without more as absolving the occupier from liability, unless in all the circumstances it was enough to enable the visitor to be reasonably safe".

Substantially the same facts provide the plaintiff with their answer to the defendants argument under this subsection. The deceased received adequate warning from Mr Collingwood, and if the defendants agents had heeded the warning, the warning would have enabled the deceased to be reasonably safe. But the defendant's agents themselves, in disregard of the warning, did the dangerous act of lighting the fire before the access vents had been sealed.  That created the concentration of carbon monxide in the alcove. That was something done by the defendant's agents, and it could not be undone by the deceased, however much they heeded Mr Collingwood's warning. In these circumstances, the warning did not enable the deceased to be reasonably safe; and in my view, therefore, this paragraph of the subsection. does not defeat the widows' claim.

Accordingly, I agree with the learned Judge's decision on the liability of the defendant, and do not have to consider his decision as to contributory negligence because that is not disputed.

I would have dismissed the appeal, but that is a minority view, and of course, the majority view of my bretheren will prevail, so that the appeal will be allowed.

ORDER: Appeal allowed.

Judgment below set aside and in lieu thereof Judgment entered for Defendants. No order for costs.
Leave to appeal to House of Lords refused Plaintiffs' costs to be taxed under Third Schedule to Legal Aid and Advice Act, 1949.


]
[

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN:  The facts of this case are simple and except on one point, a matter of quantum, not seriously in dispute. The plaintiff's car was in collision with the defendant's and was seriously damaged by what was admittedly entirely the defendant's fault.  The plaintiff therefore sued the defendant in damages. These damages he based on the cost to him of repairing his car. The defence is that the cost of doing this was unreasonable and not recoverable from the defendant having regard to the duty lying upon the plaintiff to mitigate his damages which in the circumstances it is said were not more than the market value of the car at the time of the accident together with some damages for the loss of its use while he was reasonably engaged in looking out for a comparable one.

The facts are that the plaintiff's car was a 1951 Lea Francis which he had bought in the year 1958 for the sum of £330. He is by profession a mechanical engineer and had always kept the car by his own efforts in a high state of efficiency having regard to its age.  He had done a number of mechanical repairs and renewals and at the time of the accident was in the course of repairing a damaged door which was actually off the car at the time. The market value, that is to say, the replacement value, of the car according to the ordinary guide in use in the trade was at the time £80.  The garage to which the plaintiff took the car originally took the view that repairs were uneconomic or, as the manager said, not an economic proposition. The engineer called by the defendants took the same view and the Insurance Company advised against repairs. The Insurance Company valued the car at £85 and, as the plaintiff was liable under his policy for the first £5 of damages, he was paid £80.

Notwithstanding the advice he received, the plaintiff determined to have the car repaired and this he did at a cost of £192. He took the view that the car was worth that to him. It suited his needs and the needs of his family and his opinion was that he could not buy a car of the same worth to him for less than £192.  He accordingly gave the defendant credit for the £80 received from the Insurance Company and sued for the balance together with the cost of hiring a car during the period of repair of his own.  The County Court Judge made certain deductions from the hire charges owing to delay in doing the repairs and awarded £25 under this head together with £5, being the first £5 of the insurance: otherwise the Judge in effect acceded to the plaintiff's claim, which, however, he reduced to £100 and gave the plaintiff judgment for £130, that is to say £100 for repairs plus the £5 and the £25.  The defendant appeals.

The law of damages arising out of collisions on land has been developed out of the Admiralty rule on collisions at sea and the rule of liability is the same in Admiralty and common law cases - see lord Dunedin's speech in The Susquehanna (1926 Appeal Cases, p.655, at p.661).  The principle is that of restitutio in integrum, that is to say to put the plaintiff in the same position as though the damage had not happened. It has come to be settled that in general the measure of damage is the cost of repairing the damaged article; but there is an exception if it can be proved that the cost of repairs greatly exceeds the value in the market of the damaged article. This arises out of the plaintiff's duty to minimise his damages. Were it otherwise it would be more profitable to destroy the plaintiff's article than to damage it.  In the latter cases the measure is the value of the article in the market and this, of course, supposes that there is a market in which the article can be bought.  If there is none, then the cost of repairs may still be claimed.  This appears from J. & E. Hall Ltd. v. Barclay (1937, 3 All England Reports, p.620) where it was held that the appellant was entitled to the value of the articles converted which was ordinarily the price of similar articles in the market.  As there was no market in the articles concerned, the measure of damages was the cost of replacement.  That was a case of conversion but the principle applies.  Lord Justice Greer said this at page 623: 

"In my judgment it is an undoubted fact that there are two rules with which we begin in ascertaining how the damage should be ascertained. The first is this: A plaintiff who is suffering from a wrong committed by a defendant is entitled, so far as money can do it, to be put into the same position as if he had not suffered that wrong. That is what is referred to as restitutio in integrum.  The second principle which is accepted is that what he is entitled to, as damages for conversion or detention in respect of the article so detained or converted and not returned, is the value of that article. 'Then the question is, what is the meaning of 'the value of that article'?  Where you are dealing with goods which can be readily bought in the market, a man whose rights have been interfered with is never entitled to more than what he would have to pay to buy a similar article in the market.  That rule has been acted upon over and over again, and that, I think, means that, where there is a market, the man whose rights have been interfered with is bound to diminish the damages by going into the market and buying the goods in the market, so as to put himself in the position in which he is entitled to be put, namely, the position in which he would have been if he had not suffered any wrong at all; and, in my judgment, the case to which our attention had been called of Banco de Portugal v. Waterlow & Sons, Ltd, has really nothing to do with the question that we have to decide here, except in so far as I think it supports the view which I have been expressing".  

He there decided that as the article in that particular case was one for which there was no market and which you could not buy in the market, the loser was entitled to have it replaced.

The Judge here held that the plaintiff was reasonable in having the car repaired notwithstanding that the cost was more than twice the value.  It may well be that the plaintiff, so far as he himself was concerned, did act reasonably and that what he got was of more value to him than the damages represented by the value of the car.  The plaintiff, however, did not show that he had any special use for which this car alone was suitable, as, for instance, in his business, or anything more than that it was a sound car very well maintained and suited to his ordinary life. In my opinion the Judge asked himself the wrong question.  The true question was whether the plaintiff acted reasonably as between himself and the defendant and in view of his duty to mitigate the damages.  The evidence was that a Lea Francis 1951 car might be difficult to find but that other similar estate cars were on the market and could be had for between £85 and £100 which the plaintiff himself stated to be the value of his car.  The learned Judge relied on the case of O'Grady v. Westminster Scaffolding Ltd. (1962, 2 Lloyds List Reports, p.238) where the learned Judge held the plaintiff entitled to the cost of repairing his car at a cost considerably exceeding its market value. This case, of course, is not binding on us but if it be right it may be supported perhaps on the ground that the car there in question was unique and could not be replaced.  It was a remarkable vehicle having been supplied by the plaintiff, the apple of whose eye it was, with no less than three new engines, a new body and other replacements.  In my judgment the facts are very different from those in the present case.

Our attention was also drawn to a case in the Court of Session, Pomphrey v. James A.Cuthbertson Ltd. (1951 Session Gases, p.147).  That case went off on a point of pleading and the plaintiff in fact asserted a new measure of damages in that he went into the market and bought a new car, the cost of which he claimed against the defendant together with the cost of adapting it upon the footing that this was in fact cheaper for the defendant than the cost of repairs would have been.  Nevertheless the Court delivered itself of the following opinion.  At the end of the headnote you will find this: 

"Opinions that, on the footing that the damaged car was a constructive total loss, the true measure of damages was its market value at the date of the collision plus the cost of hiring a substitute until a new car could be procured and made ready for use, less the 'scrap value' of the damaged car", 

so that the decision, such as it was, is in the defendant's favour.

To the same effect is the decision in The Minnehaha (6 Lloyds List Reports, p.12), an Admiralty case where the Master of the Rolls, Lord Sterndale, said this: 

"That applies to a matter between assurer and assured, but it is a convenient way of stating the question because unless there is some circumstance to justify him the shipowner does not act reasonably in repairing the ship if the repaired value is very much less than the cost of repairing her.  Prima facie that is not reasonable. It may be shown to be reasonable if there are certain special circumstances which make the ship of such great value to him that it is better for him and reasonable to spend a very much larger sum than her repaired value.  But it requires some special circumstances to show that, because what lies at the bottom of taking the repair value in a case of this kind is that it is assumed that the owner can go into the market and replace his ship at that value.  If he car, satisfy the tribunal that he cannot be replaced in the position in which he was before the collision by being paid the repair value of the ship, because he cannot replace the ship and cannot buy another in the market, that is another matter, but unless he can show these two points he is not acting reasonably in spending this very large sum".

In my judgment the defence succeeds: this was not an irreplaceable article and therefore as the cost of repairs greatly exceeded the value, the car should be treated as a constructive total loss and the measure of damage is its value.

What is the result?  It is now agreed that the cost of hiring as found by the learned Judge is right and this amounts to £25. The value of the car in the market must I think be taken to be £85.  I do not wish to be understood to hold that the market value is always the true measure.  There may be exceptional circumstances, as my brother Pearson shews in his judgment about to be delivered, which justify a higher figure, but for myself I do not think there is enough evidence of that in this particular case.  The plaintiff has received £80 from the Insurance Company and for this he must give credit, so that he was entitled against the defendant to £30 and judgment should be entered for him for that sum.  What effect that will have on the costs is a matter for discussion hereafter. 

LORD JUSTICE PEARSON:  In August 1958 the plaintiff bought a used motor car for about £330.  It was a 1951 Lea Francis shooting brake.  Being a mechanical engineer the plaintiff maintained it well and it was reliable.  There was no special adaptation of it.  On the 26th July, 1962, it was seriously damaged in a collision caused by the defendant's negligence. The plaintiff sued the defendant in the Haywards Heath County Court for damages for negligence, and the defendant admitted liability but denied the alleged loss and damage.

The issue in the appeal arises in this way.  The learned Judge included in his assessment of the damages a sum of £180, being the cost of repairing the damage to the vehicle, but he also made a finding that the market value was £80.  It is contended by Mr O'Connor for the appellant/defendant that the assessment should have been based on the market value and not on the cost of repair.  The other figures can be mentioned briefly.  The plaintiff is admittedly entitled to a sum of £25 for the cost of temporary hiring of a substitute vehicle.  The plaintiff gives credit for £80 received from his own Insurance Company.  As between the plaintiff and his Insurance Company the market value was taken at £85, but the plaintiff under his policy bore the first £5 of the loss.  This point is unimportant, but I think the Judge's figure of £80 for the market value should be adjusted to £85, and Mr O'Connor does not contest that.

There is no complete definition of the expression "market value" in the evidence or the judgment, but I understand it as meaning standard replacement market value, that is to say the retail price which a customer would have to pay in July 1962 on a purchase of an average vehicle of the same make, type and age or a comparable vehicle.  It is not the price for a sale to a dealer or between dealers.  It appears from a passage in the judgment that the "market value" does not include any allowance for the good maintenance and reliability of the plaintiff's vehicle.

What are the principles applicable?  The first and main principle is that the plaintiff is entitled to receive as damages such a sum of money as will place him in as good a position as he would have been in if the accident had not occurred. In the Liesbosch case (1933 Appeal Cases, p.449 at p.454) Lord Wright said: 

"It is not questioned that when a vessel is lost by collision due to the sole negligence of the wrongdoing vessel the owners of the former vessel are entitled to what is called restitutio in integrum, which means that they should recover such a sum as will replace them, so far as can be done by compensation in money, in the same position as if the loss had not been inflicted on them, subject to the rules of law as to remoteness of damage".

Now but for the accident the plaintiff would have continued to have the use of his existing motor car, the 1951 Lea Francis shooting brake, undamaged.  The accident deprived him of it.  To be restored to substantially the same position, he needed such sum of money as would enable him to provide himself with an equivalent vehicle either by having the existing damaged vehicle repaired or by finding and acquiring another vehicle equally good.

There is, however, a second principle which was stated by Viscount Haldano in the Wostinghouse case, 1912 Appeal Gases, p. 673 at p. 689: 

''The fundamental basis is thus compensation for pecuniary loss flowing from the breach; but this first principle is qualified by a second, which imposes on a plaintiff the duty of taking all reasonable stops to mitigate the loss consequent on the broach, and debars him from claiming any part of the damage which is duo to his neglect to take such steps.  In the words of Lord Justice James in Dunkirk Colliery Co. v. Lover, 'The person who has broken the contract is not to be exposed to additional cost by reason of the plaintiffs not doing what they ought to have done as reasonable men, and the plaintiffs not being under any obligation to do anything otherwise than in the ordinary course of business'".

For the purposes of the present case it is important to appreciate the true nature of the so-called "duty to mitigate the loss" or "duty to minimise the damage".  The plaintiff is not under any actual obligation to adopt the cheaper method; if he wishes to adopt the more expensive method, he is at liberty to do so and by doing so he commits no wrong against the defendant or anyone else.  The true meaning is that the plaintiff is not entitled to charge the defendant by way of damages with any greater sum than that which he reasonably needs to expend for the purpose of making good the loss.  In short, he is fully entitled to be as extravagant as he pleases but not at the expense of the defendant.

Now did the plaintiff in this case take all reasonable steps to mitigate the loss consequent on the breach?  he knew from his dealings with the Insurance Company that they assessed the replacement market value at £85, and he accepted payment from them on that basis.  The Insurance Company advised against repairs. He was told, at one time at any rate, by the repairers that It was uneconomic to have the vehicle repaired.  He had estimates of the cost and there is no evidence of the estimates being inaccurate.  After spending about £180, he would have a vehicle worth only about £85.  And yet he made no attempt to find another car.  It Is true he said in his evidence in chief that he could not replace the car with one of similar type and quality for £85, nor for less than £192, but that evidence cannot carry conviction, as he admitted in cross-examination that he did not attempt to find another car.  The witness Langley, the works manager of the repairers, said in evidence that he would not have expected to get anything reliable for £100 in September 1962.  he also said that the plaintiff discussed the repairs with their manager Redhouse and that Redhouse said it was not an economic proposition.  Barnes, the defendant's expert witness, gave the figures of prices from Glass's Guide, and said that in July to September 1962 it would be difficult to find a Lea Francis but you could find other estate cars.  Then in the notes of his evidence there is the word "uneconomic".

In my view it is impossible to find from the evidence that the plaintiff took all reasonable steps to mitigate the loss, or did all that he reasonably could do to keep down the cost.  He was fully entitled to have his damaged vehicle repaired at whatever cost because he preferred it.  But he was not justified in charging against the defendant the case of repairing the damaged vehicle when that cost was more than twice the replacement market value and he had made no attempt to find a replacement vehicle.

The learned Judge in his Judgment stated his view very cogently and at first I thought It was right, but after consideration of the arguments in this appeal I am unable to accept it, because he was not giving due effect to the principles of mitigation of loss or minimising of damage.  He was not paying sufficient regard to the economic aspect of the matter.

He said: 

"Evidence has been given on behalf of the defence that it was uneconomical to repair, but I do not think that kind of phrase really helps.  What was reasonable for the plaintiff to do?"  

Later he said: 

"What would a reasonable man do?  I do not think I ought to look at it merely from the point of view of a lawyer or a hard-headed business man or of the precise mathematician.  What would the ordinary man in the street do in a case like this?"  

In my opinion there is an error of principle involved in these passages.  It is vital, for the purpose of assessing damages fairly between the plaintiff and the defendant, to consider whether the plaintiff's course of action 'was economic or uneconomic, and if it was uneconomic it cannot (at any rate in the absence of special circumstances, of which there is no evidence in this case) form a proper basis for assessment of damages.  The question has to be considered from the point of view of a business man.  It seems to me the practical business view is that if the cost of repairing your damaged vehicle is greatly in excess of the market price, you must look around for a replacement and you would expect to find one at a cost not far removed from the market price, although unless you were lucky you might have to pay something more than the standard market price to obtain a true equivalent of a well-maintained and reliable vehicle.

In my view the appellant/defendant succeeds on the issue of principle.  The assessment should be based on the market price and not on the much higher cost of repairing the damaged vehicle, and therefore the learned Judge's assessment was made on a wrong basis and should be reduced.

In considering what reduction should be made, it may not be appropriate to take the exact figure of the market price, which I understand to be the standard market price of an average vehicle of the make, type and ago of the plaintiff's vehicle. There should be an element of flexibility in the assessment of damages to achieve a result which is fair and just as between the parties in the particular case.  In the Liesbosch case Lord Wright at p. 463 quoted Lord Sumner in Admiralty Commissioners v. S.S.Chekiang (Owners) 1926 Appeal Cases, pp.637, 643: 

'"The measure of damages ought never to be governed by mere rules of practice nor can such rules override the principles of the law on this subject'".  

Lord Wright went on to say: 

"Lord Sumner also distinguishes 'a rule of thumb' from what is binding law. In these cases the dominant rule -of law is the principle of restitutio in integrum, and subsidiary rules can only be justified if they give effect to that rule".  

Although I am not able to agree with the learned Judge that £180, the cost of repair, can be regarded as a reasonable figure as between the parties, I do agree with him that the bare market value seems too low, as he accepted the plaintiff's evidence as to good maintenance and reliability, and there was the evidence of Langley that he would not have expected to get anything reliable for £100 in September 1962.  I am impressed by this passage in the Judgment: 

"Did the plaintiff act reasonably?  What would a jury say? Would a jury say that the plaintiff had acted so unreasonably that he is not entitled to a penny-piece more than the market value of the car?  I do not think they would.  Certainly if they had had any experience of buying an old secondhand car they would not".

As it would be no kindness to either party to order a new trial on this merely residual question as to what the exact figure should be, it would be appropriate for this Court to fix it by a rough and ready estimate.  I would fix it at £105 less £80 received by the plaintiff from his own Insurance Company plus £25 for hiring charges, and the resulting figure is £50.  I would allow the appeal, reducing the damages to £50.  However, as both my brethren take a different view as to the extent of the reduction which should be made on the evidence given in this case, their view as to the final figure of damages prevails.

I should add this. In the case of O'Grady v. Westminster Scaffolding Ltd., 1962, 2 Lloyd's List Reports, p.238, the decision was justified by the very unusual facts, which made the vehicle unique, so that the standard market value was irrelevant.  This is clear from two passages of the Judgment referring to the car known to the plaintiff and his family as "Hortensia",   On p.239: 

"But it is clear that she was regularly maintained by a competent firm of motor engineers and the defendants did not seek to dispute that this cost Mm some £300 to £400 per annum.  During the period of his ownership her engine was replaced on three occasions, an entirely new one having been put in in the year before the accident at a cost of £162.10s. and that same year the coachwork had been completely renewed for the sum of £180.  Work had also recently been done on, among other things, the wheels, the steering column and the hood".  

On p 240: 

"...the remainder of the letter significantly adds: ... we appreciate that this figure (that is £200) is in excess of what a car of this type would normally fetch, but owing to its condition (and I stress that word) it could be considered as unique and it is doubtful whether a car in similar condition would be available".  

The present case is quite different, as the plaintiff's vehicle was an ordinary Lea Francis shooting brake of the year 1951 though according to the evidence it was better than average in respect of maintenance and reliability. 

MR JUSTICE PENNYCUICK: I agree that this appeal should be allowed.

The basic measure of damage, so far as now material, is restitution.  In the case of injury to a chattel, it may happen that restitution can be effected either by repair of the existing article or by the purchase of a comparable article, i.e. an article possessing broadly similar attributes though not necessarily identical. In such a case the measure of damage is restitution by whichever method it would be reasonable for the owner of the chattel to adopt in the particular circumstances. In considering what is reasonable one must, I think, having regard to the owner's obligation to mitigate damage, treat him as looking only to his pecuniary interest and leave out of account matters of mere taste or convenience. The injured party can in these respects suit his fancy at his own expense but not at the expense of the other party. Where the cost of repairs would exceed the market value of the article, and in the absence of special circumstances, the reasonable method must be to purchase a comparable article. By 'market value' in this connection is meant the price at which the article before damage, or a comparable article, could be purchased.  As a rule the scrap value of the damaged chattel must be brought into account but this is not a factor here.

Turning to the present case, the market value of the damaged car was admittedly £80. It was, however, taken by the Insurance Company at £85 and I will treat the latter figure as being the market value.  The cost of repair was £192.  On these figures, in the absence of special circumstances, it is clear that the reasonable course for the plaintiff would have been to purchase a comparable car rather than repair the damaged car.

The learned Judge correctly held that the test was whether the plaintiff acted reasonably in spending £192 on repairs to the damaged car.  He proceeded to answer this question in the affirmative as regards the £180.  The grounds for this conclusion may be taken from the following passage in his Judgment: 

"The reasonable man would say he would sooner have his own car which he knew than spend £80 on a similar car if available.  He would get a car about eleven years old with unknown history and unknown mechanical condition and probably with worn tyres".  

Then a little later: 

"The plaintiff preferred to repair something he had got and know than take his £80 into the market and buy an unknown quantity.  He acted reasonably by and large".  

In so far as the learned Judge is here taking into account the personal convenience of the plaintiff, he is I think departing from the correct test of pecuniary interest.  In so far as he is taking into account pecuniary interest, his reasoning seems to me to contain a flaw. In reaching the market value of the car, the hypothetical value must be regarded as having taken into account all its relevant attributes, that is mechanical condition, state of tyres and the like.  It cannot be legitimate to take the market value and then make an addition for good condition.  To do so is to bring the same factor into account twice over.  The point may be illustrated by reading two answers by the plaintiff in the notes of evidence. 

(i) "Could not replace for £85 i.e. not of similar type and quality - not for less than £192".   
(ii) "Market value at accident £80 to £100".  

The Judge accepted the plaintiff's evidence completely.  But these two answers are in truth irreconcileable. If one could not obtain a car of similar type and quality for less than £192, then that would be the market value of the car and vice versa. It is to be observed that there is no evidence to suggest that it would have been impossible to obtain a comparable car. The plaintiff deposed that he did not attempt to find one.

The case of O'Grady v. Westminster Scaffolding Ltd., 1962, 2 Lloyd's List Law Reports, may be distinguished on the ground that the car "Hortensia" was a unique article and that no comparable article could have been purchased. It is as though someone had elected to drive around in a mechanised replica of the Lord Major's coach. I would prefer not to express any view of the measure of damage which falls upon a party unfortunate enough to injure a freak article.

I would reduce the damages here to £30, i.e. £25 for hire and £5 for damage not covered by insurance.  I do not myself think there is any evidence in this case which would justify an award over and above this amount.

Order: Appeal allowed with costs.  Plaintiff to have the costs in the County Court down to the date of delivery of defence and defendant will have the costs of that action thereafter  Scale 2 for the plaintiff up to the date of defence and Scale 4 for the defendant.


]
[

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN:  The facts of this case are simple and except on one point, a matter of quantum, not seriously in dispute. The plaintiff's car was in collision with the defendant's and was seriously damaged by what was admittedly entirely the defendant's fault.  The plaintiff therefore sued the defendant in damages. These damages he based on the cost to him of repairing his car. The defence is that the cost of doing this was unreasonable and not recoverable from the defendant having regard to the duty lying upon the plaintiff to mitigate his damages which in the circumstances it is said were not more than the market value of the car at the time of the accident together with some damages for the loss of its use while he was reasonably engaged in looking out for a comparable one.

The facts are that the plaintiff's car was a 1951 Lea Francis which he had bought in the year 1958 for the sum of £330. He is by profession a mechanical engineer and had always kept the car by his own efforts in a high state of efficiency having regard to its age.  He had done a number of mechanical repairs and renewals and at the time of the accident was in the course of repairing a damaged door which was actually off the car at the time. The market value, that is to say, the replacement value, of the car according to the ordinary guide in use in the trade was at the time £80.  The garage to which the plaintiff took the car originally took the view that repairs were uneconomic or, as the manager said, not an economic proposition. The engineer called by the defendants took the same view and the Insurance Company advised against repairs. The Insurance Company valued the car at £85 and, as the plaintiff was liable under his policy for the first £5 of damages, he was paid £80.

Notwithstanding the advice he received, the plaintiff determined to have the car repaired and this he did at a cost of £192. He took the view that the car was worth that to him. It suited his needs and the needs of his family and his opinion was that he could not buy a car of the same worth to him for less than £192.  He accordingly gave the defendant credit for the £80 received from the Insurance Company and sued for the balance together with the cost of hiring a car during the period of repair of his own.  The County Court Judge made certain deductions from the hire charges owing to delay in doing the repairs and awarded £25 under this head together with £5, being the first £5 of the insurance: otherwise the Judge in effect acceded to the plaintiff's claim, which, however, he reduced to £100 and gave the plaintiff judgment for £130, that is to say £100 for repairs plus the £5 and the £25.  The defendant appeals.

The law of damages arising out of collisions on land has been developed out of the Admiralty rule on collisions at sea and the rule of liability is the same in Admiralty and common law cases - see lord Dunedin's speech in The Susquehanna (1926 Appeal Cases, p.655, at p.661).  The principle is that of restitutio in integrum, that is to say to put the plaintiff in the same position as though the damage had not happened. It has come to be settled that in general the measure of damage is the cost of repairing the damaged article; but there is an exception if it can be proved that the cost of repairs greatly exceeds the value in the market of the damaged article. This arises out of the plaintiff's duty to minimise his damages. Were it otherwise it would be more profitable to destroy the plaintiff's article than to damage it.  In the latter cases the measure is the value of the article in the market and this, of course, supposes that there is a market in which the article can be bought.  If there is none, then the cost of repairs may still be claimed.  This appears from J. & E. Hall Ltd. v. Barclay (1937, 3 All England Reports, p.620) where it was held that the appellant was entitled to the value of the articles converted which was ordinarily the price of similar articles in the market.  As there was no market in the articles concerned, the measure of damages was the cost of replacement.  That was a case of conversion but the principle applies.  Lord Justice Greer said this at page 623: 

"In my judgment it is an undoubted fact that there are two rules with which we begin in ascertaining how the damage should be ascertained. The first is this: A plaintiff who is suffering from a wrong committed by a defendant is entitled, so far as money can do it, to be put into the same position as if he had not suffered that wrong. That is what is referred to as restitutio in integrum.  The second principle which is accepted is that what he is entitled to, as damages for conversion or detention in respect of the article so detained or converted and not returned, is the value of that article. 'Then the question is, what is the meaning of 'the value of that article'?  Where you are dealing with goods which can be readily bought in the market, a man whose rights have been interfered with is never entitled to more than what he would have to pay to buy a similar article in the market.  That rule has been acted upon over and over again, and that, I think, means that, where there is a market, the man whose rights have been interfered with is bound to diminish the damages by going into the market and buying the goods in the market, so as to put himself in the position in which he is entitled to be put, namely, the position in which he would have been if he had not suffered any wrong at all; and, in my judgment, the case to which our attention had been called of Banco de Portugal v. Waterlow & Sons, Ltd, has really nothing to do with the question that we have to decide here, except in so far as I think it supports the view which I have been expressing".  

He there decided that as the article in that particular case was one for which there was no market and which you could not buy in the market, the loser was entitled to have it replaced.

The Judge here held that the plaintiff was reasonable in having the car repaired notwithstanding that the cost was more than twice the value.  It may well be that the plaintiff, so far as he himself was concerned, did act reasonably and that what he got was of more value to him than the damages represented by the value of the car.  The plaintiff, however, did not show that he had any special use for which this car alone was suitable, as, for instance, in his business, or anything more than that it was a sound car very well maintained and suited to his ordinary life. In my opinion the Judge asked himself the wrong question.  The true question was whether the plaintiff acted reasonably as between himself and the defendant and in view of his duty to mitigate the damages.  The evidence was that a Lea Francis 1951 car might be difficult to find but that other similar estate cars were on the market and could be had for between £85 and £100 which the plaintiff himself stated to be the value of his car.  The learned Judge relied on the case of O'Grady v. Westminster Scaffolding Ltd. (1962, 2 Lloyds List Reports, p.238) where the learned Judge held the plaintiff entitled to the cost of repairing his car at a cost considerably exceeding its market value. This case, of course, is not binding on us but if it be right it may be supported perhaps on the ground that the car there in question was unique and could not be replaced.  It was a remarkable vehicle having been supplied by the plaintiff, the apple of whose eye it was, with no less than three new engines, a new body and other replacements.  In my judgment the facts are very different from those in the present case.

Our attention was also drawn to a case in the Court of Session, Pomphrey v. James A.Cuthbertson Ltd. (1951 Session Gases, p.147).  That case went off on a point of pleading and the plaintiff in fact asserted a new measure of damages in that he went into the market and bought a new car, the cost of which he claimed against the defendant together with the cost of adapting it upon the footing that this was in fact cheaper for the defendant than the cost of repairs would have been.  Nevertheless the Court delivered itself of the following opinion.  At the end of the headnote you will find this: 

"Opinions that, on the footing that the damaged car was a constructive total loss, the true measure of damages was its market value at the date of the collision plus the cost of hiring a substitute until a new car could be procured and made ready for use, less the 'scrap value' of the damaged car", 

so that the decision, such as it was, is in the defendant's favour.

To the same effect is the decision in The Minnehaha (6 Lloyds List Reports, p.12), an Admiralty case where the Master of the Rolls, Lord Sterndale, said this: 

"That applies to a matter between assurer and assured, but it is a convenient way of stating the question because unless there is some circumstance to justify him the shipowner does not act reasonably in repairing the ship if the repaired value is very much less than the cost of repairing her.  Prima facie that is not reasonable. It may be shown to be reasonable if there are certain special circumstances which make the ship of such great value to him that it is better for him and reasonable to spend a very much larger sum than her repaired value.  But it requires some special circumstances to show that, because what lies at the bottom of taking the repair value in a case of this kind is that it is assumed that the owner can go into the market and replace his ship at that value.  If he car, satisfy the tribunal that he cannot be replaced in the position in which he was before the collision by being paid the repair value of the ship, because he cannot replace the ship and cannot buy another in the market, that is another matter, but unless he can show these two points he is not acting reasonably in spending this very large sum".

In my judgment the defence succeeds: this was not an irreplaceable article and therefore as the cost of repairs greatly exceeded the value, the car should be treated as a constructive total loss and the measure of damage is its value.

What is the result?  It is now agreed that the cost of hiring as found by the learned Judge is right and this amounts to £25. The value of the car in the market must I think be taken to be £85.  I do not wish to be understood to hold that the market value is always the true measure.  There may be exceptional circumstances, as my brother Pearson shews in his judgment about to be delivered, which justify a higher figure, but for myself I do not think there is enough evidence of that in this particular case.  The plaintiff has received £80 from the Insurance Company and for this he must give credit, so that he was entitled against the defendant to £30 and judgment should be entered for him for that sum.  What effect that will have on the costs is a matter for discussion hereafter. 

LORD JUSTICE PEARSON:  In August 1958 the plaintiff bought a used motor car for about £330.  It was a 1951 Lea Francis shooting brake.  Being a mechanical engineer the plaintiff maintained it well and it was reliable.  There was no special adaptation of it.  On the 26th July, 1962, it was seriously damaged in a collision caused by the defendant's negligence. The plaintiff sued the defendant in the Haywards Heath County Court for damages for negligence, and the defendant admitted liability but denied the alleged loss and damage.

The issue in the appeal arises in this way.  The learned Judge included in his assessment of the damages a sum of £180, being the cost of repairing the damage to the vehicle, but he also made a finding that the market value was £80.  It is contended by Mr O'Connor for the appellant/defendant that the assessment should have been based on the market value and not on the cost of repair.  The other figures can be mentioned briefly.  The plaintiff is admittedly entitled to a sum of £25 for the cost of temporary hiring of a substitute vehicle.  The plaintiff gives credit for £80 received from his own Insurance Company.  As between the plaintiff and his Insurance Company the market value was taken at £85, but the plaintiff under his policy bore the first £5 of the loss.  This point is unimportant, but I think the Judge's figure of £80 for the market value should be adjusted to £85, and Mr O'Connor does not contest that.

There is no complete definition of the expression "market value" in the evidence or the judgment, but I understand it as meaning standard replacement market value, that is to say the retail price which a customer would have to pay in July 1962 on a purchase of an average vehicle of the same make, type and age or a comparable vehicle.  It is not the price for a sale to a dealer or between dealers.  It appears from a passage in the judgment that the "market value" does not include any allowance for the good maintenance and reliability of the plaintiff's vehicle.

What are the principles applicable?  The first and main principle is that the plaintiff is entitled to receive as damages such a sum of money as will place him in as good a position as he would have been in if the accident had not occurred. In the Liesbosch case (1933 Appeal Cases, p.449 at p.454) Lord Wright said: 

"It is not questioned that when a vessel is lost by collision due to the sole negligence of the wrongdoing vessel the owners of the former vessel are entitled to what is called restitutio in integrum, which means that they should recover such a sum as will replace them, so far as can be done by compensation in money, in the same position as if the loss had not been inflicted on them, subject to the rules of law as to remoteness of damage".

Now but for the accident the plaintiff would have continued to have the use of his existing motor car, the 1951 Lea Francis shooting brake, undamaged.  The accident deprived him of it.  To be restored to substantially the same position, he needed such sum of money as would enable him to provide himself with an equivalent vehicle either by having the existing damaged vehicle repaired or by finding and acquiring another vehicle equally good.

There is, however, a second principle which was stated by Viscount Haldano in the Wostinghouse case, 1912 Appeal Gases, p. 673 at p. 689: 

''The fundamental basis is thus compensation for pecuniary loss flowing from the breach; but this first principle is qualified by a second, which imposes on a plaintiff the duty of taking all reasonable stops to mitigate the loss consequent on the broach, and debars him from claiming any part of the damage which is duo to his neglect to take such steps.  In the words of Lord Justice James in Dunkirk Colliery Co. v. Lover, 'The person who has broken the contract is not to be exposed to additional cost by reason of the plaintiffs not doing what they ought to have done as reasonable men, and the plaintiffs not being under any obligation to do anything otherwise than in the ordinary course of business'".

For the purposes of the present case it is important to appreciate the true nature of the so-called "duty to mitigate the loss" or "duty to minimise the damage".  The plaintiff is not under any actual obligation to adopt the cheaper method; if he wishes to adopt the more expensive method, he is at liberty to do so and by doing so he commits no wrong against the defendant or anyone else.  The true meaning is that the plaintiff is not entitled to charge the defendant by way of damages with any greater sum than that which he reasonably needs to expend for the purpose of making good the loss.  In short, he is fully entitled to be as extravagant as he pleases but not at the expense of the defendant.

Now did the plaintiff in this case take all reasonable steps to mitigate the loss consequent on the breach?  he knew from his dealings with the Insurance Company that they assessed the replacement market value at £85, and he accepted payment from them on that basis.  The Insurance Company advised against repairs. He was told, at one time at any rate, by the repairers that It was uneconomic to have the vehicle repaired.  He had estimates of the cost and there is no evidence of the estimates being inaccurate.  After spending about £180, he would have a vehicle worth only about £85.  And yet he made no attempt to find another car.  It Is true he said in his evidence in chief that he could not replace the car with one of similar type and quality for £85, nor for less than £192, but that evidence cannot carry conviction, as he admitted in cross-examination that he did not attempt to find another car.  The witness Langley, the works manager of the repairers, said in evidence that he would not have expected to get anything reliable for £100 in September 1962.  he also said that the plaintiff discussed the repairs with their manager Redhouse and that Redhouse said it was not an economic proposition.  Barnes, the defendant's expert witness, gave the figures of prices from Glass's Guide, and said that in July to September 1962 it would be difficult to find a Lea Francis but you could find other estate cars.  Then in the notes of his evidence there is the word "uneconomic".

In my view it is impossible to find from the evidence that the plaintiff took all reasonable steps to mitigate the loss, or did all that he reasonably could do to keep down the cost.  He was fully entitled to have his damaged vehicle repaired at whatever cost because he preferred it.  But he was not justified in charging against the defendant the case of repairing the damaged vehicle when that cost was more than twice the replacement market value and he had made no attempt to find a replacement vehicle.

The learned Judge in his Judgment stated his view very cogently and at first I thought It was right, but after consideration of the arguments in this appeal I am unable to accept it, because he was not giving due effect to the principles of mitigation of loss or minimising of damage.  He was not paying sufficient regard to the economic aspect of the matter.

He said: 

"Evidence has been given on behalf of the defence that it was uneconomical to repair, but I do not think that kind of phrase really helps.  What was reasonable for the plaintiff to do?"  

Later he said: 

"What would a reasonable man do?  I do not think I ought to look at it merely from the point of view of a lawyer or a hard-headed business man or of the precise mathematician.  What would the ordinary man in the street do in a case like this?"  

In my opinion there is an error of principle involved in these passages.  It is vital, for the purpose of assessing damages fairly between the plaintiff and the defendant, to consider whether the plaintiff's course of action 'was economic or uneconomic, and if it was uneconomic it cannot (at any rate in the absence of special circumstances, of which there is no evidence in this case) form a proper basis for assessment of damages.  The question has to be considered from the point of view of a business man.  It seems to me the practical business view is that if the cost of repairing your damaged vehicle is greatly in excess of the market price, you must look around for a replacement and you would expect to find one at a cost not far removed from the market price, although unless you were lucky you might have to pay something more than the standard market price to obtain a true equivalent of a well-maintained and reliable vehicle.

In my view the appellant/defendant succeeds on the issue of principle.  The assessment should be based on the market price and not on the much higher cost of repairing the damaged vehicle, and therefore the learned Judge's assessment was made on a wrong basis and should be reduced.

In considering what reduction should be made, it may not be appropriate to take the exact figure of the market price, which I understand to be the standard market price of an average vehicle of the make, type and ago of the plaintiff's vehicle. There should be an element of flexibility in the assessment of damages to achieve a result which is fair and just as between the parties in the particular case.  In the Liesbosch case Lord Wright at p. 463 quoted Lord Sumner in Admiralty Commissioners v. S.S.Chekiang (Owners) 1926 Appeal Cases, pp.637, 643: 

'"The measure of damages ought never to be governed by mere rules of practice nor can such rules override the principles of the law on this subject'".  

Lord Wright went on to say: 

"Lord Sumner also distinguishes 'a rule of thumb' from what is binding law. In these cases the dominant rule -of law is the principle of restitutio in integrum, and subsidiary rules can only be justified if they give effect to that rule".  

Although I am not able to agree with the learned Judge that £180, the cost of repair, can be regarded as a reasonable figure as between the parties, I do agree with him that the bare market value seems too low, as he accepted the plaintiff's evidence as to good maintenance and reliability, and there was the evidence of Langley that he would not have expected to get anything reliable for £100 in September 1962.  I am impressed by this passage in the Judgment: 

"Did the plaintiff act reasonably?  What would a jury say? Would a jury say that the plaintiff had acted so unreasonably that he is not entitled to a penny-piece more than the market value of the car?  I do not think they would.  Certainly if they had had any experience of buying an old secondhand car they would not".

As it would be no kindness to either party to order a new trial on this merely residual question as to what the exact figure should be, it would be appropriate for this Court to fix it by a rough and ready estimate.  I would fix it at £105 less £80 received by the plaintiff from his own Insurance Company plus £25 for hiring charges, and the resulting figure is £50.  I would allow the appeal, reducing the damages to £50.  However, as both my brethren take a different view as to the extent of the reduction which should be made on the evidence given in this case, their view as to the final figure of damages prevails.

I should add this. In the case of O'Grady v. Westminster Scaffolding Ltd., 1962, 2 Lloyd's List Reports, p.238, the decision was justified by the very unusual facts, which made the vehicle unique, so that the standard market value was irrelevant.  This is clear from two passages of the Judgment referring to the car known to the plaintiff and his family as "Hortensia",   On p.239: 

"But it is clear that she was regularly maintained by a competent firm of motor engineers and the defendants did not seek to dispute that this cost Mm some £300 to £400 per annum.  During the period of his ownership her engine was replaced on three occasions, an entirely new one having been put in in the year before the accident at a cost of £162.10s. and that same year the coachwork had been completely renewed for the sum of £180.  Work had also recently been done on, among other things, the wheels, the steering column and the hood".  

On p 240: 

"...the remainder of the letter significantly adds: ... we appreciate that this figure (that is £200) is in excess of what a car of this type would normally fetch, but owing to its condition (and I stress that word) it could be considered as unique and it is doubtful whether a car in similar condition would be available".  

The present case is quite different, as the plaintiff's vehicle was an ordinary Lea Francis shooting brake of the year 1951 though according to the evidence it was better than average in respect of maintenance and reliability. 

MR JUSTICE PENNYCUICK: I agree that this appeal should be allowed.

The basic measure of damage, so far as now material, is restitution.  In the case of injury to a chattel, it may happen that restitution can be effected either by repair of the existing article or by the purchase of a comparable article, i.e. an article possessing broadly similar attributes though not necessarily identical. In such a case the measure of damage is restitution by whichever method it would be reasonable for the owner of the chattel to adopt in the particular circumstances. In considering what is reasonable one must, I think, having regard to the owner's obligation to mitigate damage, treat him as looking only to his pecuniary interest and leave out of account matters of mere taste or convenience. The injured party can in these respects suit his fancy at his own expense but not at the expense of the other party. Where the cost of repairs would exceed the market value of the article, and in the absence of special circumstances, the reasonable method must be to purchase a comparable article. By 'market value' in this connection is meant the price at which the article before damage, or a comparable article, could be purchased.  As a rule the scrap value of the damaged chattel must be brought into account but this is not a factor here.

Turning to the present case, the market value of the damaged car was admittedly £80. It was, however, taken by the Insurance Company at £85 and I will treat the latter figure as being the market value.  The cost of repair was £192.  On these figures, in the absence of special circumstances, it is clear that the reasonable course for the plaintiff would have been to purchase a comparable car rather than repair the damaged car.

The learned Judge correctly held that the test was whether the plaintiff acted reasonably in spending £192 on repairs to the damaged car.  He proceeded to answer this question in the affirmative as regards the £180.  The grounds for this conclusion may be taken from the following passage in his Judgment: 

"The reasonable man would say he would sooner have his own car which he knew than spend £80 on a similar car if available.  He would get a car about eleven years old with unknown history and unknown mechanical condition and probably with worn tyres".  

Then a little later: 

"The plaintiff preferred to repair something he had got and know than take his £80 into the market and buy an unknown quantity.  He acted reasonably by and large".  

In so far as the learned Judge is here taking into account the personal convenience of the plaintiff, he is I think departing from the correct test of pecuniary interest.  In so far as he is taking into account pecuniary interest, his reasoning seems to me to contain a flaw. In reaching the market value of the car, the hypothetical value must be regarded as having taken into account all its relevant attributes, that is mechanical condition, state of tyres and the like.  It cannot be legitimate to take the market value and then make an addition for good condition.  To do so is to bring the same factor into account twice over.  The point may be illustrated by reading two answers by the plaintiff in the notes of evidence. 

(i) "Could not replace for £85 i.e. not of similar type and quality - not for less than £192".   
(ii) "Market value at accident £80 to £100".  

The Judge accepted the plaintiff's evidence completely.  But these two answers are in truth irreconcileable. If one could not obtain a car of similar type and quality for less than £192, then that would be the market value of the car and vice versa. It is to be observed that there is no evidence to suggest that it would have been impossible to obtain a comparable car. The plaintiff deposed that he did not attempt to find one.

The case of O'Grady v. Westminster Scaffolding Ltd., 1962, 2 Lloyd's List Law Reports, may be distinguished on the ground that the car "Hortensia" was a unique article and that no comparable article could have been purchased. It is as though someone had elected to drive around in a mechanised replica of the Lord Major's coach. I would prefer not to express any view of the measure of damage which falls upon a party unfortunate enough to injure a freak article.

I would reduce the damages here to £30, i.e. £25 for hire and £5 for damage not covered by insurance.  I do not myself think there is any evidence in this case which would justify an award over and above this amount.

Order: Appeal allowed with costs.  Plaintiff to have the costs in the County Court down to the date of delivery of defence and defendant will have the costs of that action thereafter  Scale 2 for the plaintiff up to the date of defence and Scale 4 for the defendant.


]
[

LORD PEARCE (read by Lord Justice Harman): The Defendants appeal from a Judgment of Mr Justice Stable awarding to the Plaintiff £150 damages for personal injuries suffered in an accident which occurred during the Plaintiff's employment at the Defendants' factory.

The scene of the accident was the heat-treatment department to which the Plaintiff had gone for the purpose of delivering a message to the foreman. In that department there stood two baths or cauldrons 3ft. 10ins. high and 3ft. 4ins. square. They had thick walls intended to resist great heat so that the internal area of each bath was only 18 by 31 inches.  Into those baths was placed sodium cyanide powder. Two upright electrodes, lowered by chains into the bath, passed an electric current through the powder which became a molten liquid and attained the very great heat of 800 degrees Centigrade, eight times the heat of boiling water. The process consisted of subjecting metal parts to heat by immersing them in the liquid. In order to conserve the heat in each bath there were two loose covers which rested side by side over it. These covers were made of a compressed compound of asbestos and cement known as Sindanyo which, until this accident occurred, was thought to be a safe and suitable material for such a purpose. It had been so used in England and the United States for over 20 years. The Defendants bought the covers for the particular purpose from the reputable manufacturers of the baths.

Immediately before the accident the electrodes in the bath were being changed by a workman standing on the side of the bath. He, or some other of the four workmen in the vicinity, must have inadvertently knocked the loose asbestos cement cover so that it slid into the bath and disappeared from sight beneath the molten liquid. Nobody regarded this as a dangerous matter or withdrew from the neighbourhood of the bath. Two men actually moved closer to peer into the bath and see what had happened. After an interval, which one witness put at one minute and another at two minutes, the molten liquid erupted from the bath, injuring the bystanders by its great heat and setting fire to objects on which it fell. The Plaintiff was at that moment standing by the side of the foreman not far from the bath.

The reason for the eruption was discovered by experiments which Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd., who had installed similar covers, carried out as a result of this accident.  It then appeared that whenever any cover made of compound asbestos cement was immersed in the molten liquid and subjected to a temperature of over 500 degrees it created such an eruption. At that temperature the compound, which contains hydrogen and oxygen, undergoes a chemical change which either creates or releases water. This water turns to steam and produces an explosion or eruption which throws some of the hot molten liquid out of the bath, Thus the immersion of the cover in the bath was inevitably followed by an eruption of liquid from the bath. The same result would occur if something that contained actual moisture in it (as opposed to what might be called the potential moisture which is thus precipitated by great heat) was immersed; if, for instance, this cover, which is porous and capable of holding water, had been immersed when wet. But it was not suggested that this particular cover contained actual moisture at the time of the accident, since it had been standing in the hot room for some days beforehand.

The learned Judge held that, as the evidence showed, the Defendants did not appreciate that the immersion of the cover in the liquid would produce an explosion and he held that they were not to blame for not appreciating it. He continued:  

"The result simply is this that if, for example, the bath contained an amount of this substance and it exploded whilst it was being used in the ordinary way, I think the Defendants would have escaped liability". 

That is clearly right.

He went on to hold, however, that it must have been common knowledge that there were substances which, if dropped into such immense heat, would produce an explosion, although not all substances would do so; and that, therefore, "every possible precaution should be taken to see that nothing was dropped into the bath which could have that result". He therefore held that the inadvertence of one of the Defendants' workmen in upsetting the cover into the bath was "negligent in the true sense of the word; that is to say, it constituted an actionable wrong".

No authorities were cited to the learned Judge at the trial and at that date, we are told, the Judgment of the Privy Council in the Wagon Mound, reported in 1961 Appeal Cases, 388, had not yet been reported.  In the light of that important case which gave such a different complexion to cases where seemingly harmless acts result in unforeseeable calamities, I think that the learned Judge, if it had been called to his attention in the case, might have reached a different conclusion. In the Wagon Mound case the Board held that Re Polemis should no longer be regarded as good law and that the essential factor in determining liability for the consequences of a tortious act of negligence is whether the damage is of such a kind as the reasonable man should have foreseen. "After the event", said Lord Simonds giving the Judgment of the Board, at page 424, "even a fool is wise. But it is not the hindsight of a fool; it is the foresight of the reasonable man which alone can determine responsibility".

In the present case the evidence showed that nobody supposed that an asbestos cement cover could not safely be immersed in the bath. The learned Judge took the view, which Mr James concedes was correct, that if the Defendants had deliberately immersed this cover in the bath as part of the normal process, they could not have been held liable for the resulting explosion. The fact that they inadvertently knocked it into the bath cannot of itself convert into negligence that which they were entitled to do deliberately. In the then state of their knowledge, for which the learned Judge, rightly on the evidence, held them in no way to blame, the accident was not foreseeable. In spite of Mr James' able argument I am of opinion that they cannot, therefore, be held liable for negligence.

Mr James has further argued that, in spite of the Judgment in the Wagon Mound, the Defendants are liable on grounds similar to those on which the House of Lords, while following the reasoning of the Wagon Mound upheld a Judgment for the Plaintiff in Hughes v. Lord Advocate, reported in 1963 2 Weekly Law Reports, 779. In that case an allurement to children in the roadway constituted by a red lamp, a hole in the ground and a tarpaulin tent caused an unforeseeable explosion and injury by burns. Their Lordships held, however, that although the exact chain of events was unforeseeable, the type of accident and the injuries "though perhaps different in degree, did not differ in kind from injuries which might have resulted from an accident of a foreseeable nature".  (See Lord Reid's Speech at page 781). 

"Of course the pursuer has to prove that the defender's fault caused the accident and there could be a case where the intrusion of a new and unexpected factor could be regarded as the cause of the accident rather than the fault of the defender. But that is not this case. The cause of this accident was a known source of danger, the lamp, but it behaved in an unpredictable way". 

He concludes with these words:  

"This accident was caused by a known source of danger but caused in a way which could not have been foreseen and in my judgment that affords no defence".

In the present case the potential eruptive qualities of the covers when immersed in great heat were not suspected and they were not a known source of danger, but Mr James argues that the cause of injury was the escape of the hot liquid from the bath, and that injury through the escape of liquid from the bath by splashing was foreseeable. The evidence showed that splashes caused by sudden immersion, whether of the metal objects for which it was intended or any other extraneous object, were a foreseeable danger which should be carefully avoided. The falling cover might have ejected the liquid by a splash and in the result it did eject the liquid, though in a more dramatic fashion. Therefore, he argues, the actual accident was merely a variant of foreseeable accidents by splashing. It is clear, however, both by inference and by one explicit observation, that the learned Judge regarded splashes as being in quite a different category. Moreover, according to the evidence it seems that the cover never did create a splash: it appears to have slid into the liquid at an angle of some 45 degrees and dived obliquely downwards. Further, it seems somewhat doubtful whether the cover falling only from a height of 4 or 6 inches, which was the difference in level between the liquid and the sides, could have splashed any liquid outside the bath. And when (if ever) the Plaintiff was in the area in which he could be hit by a mere splash (apparently the liquid being heavy, if splashed, would not travel further than a foot from the bath) the cover had already slid into the liquid without splashing. Indeed, it seems from the Plaintiff's evidence that when he first came on to the scene the cover was already half in and half out of the liquid. On broader grounds, however, it would be quite unrealistic to describe this accident as a variant of the perils from splashing. The cause of the accident, to quote Lord Reid's words, was "the intrusion of a new and unexpected factor". There was an eruption due to chemical changes underneath the surface of the liquid as opposed to a splash caused by displacement from bodies falling on to its surface.  In my judgment, the reasoning in Hughes v. Lord Advocate cannot be extended far enough to cover this case.

I have great sympathy with the Plaintiff who suffered injury through no fault of his own. But, in my judgment, the Defendants cannot, on the evidence, be held guilty of negligence, and I would accordingly allow the appeal and enter Judgment for the Defendants. 

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: The learned Judge appears to have decided this case in favour of the Plaintiff upon the footing that having regarded to the peril engendered by the presence in the cauldron of this mass of molten material and to the knowledge which the Defendants had that certain substances might produce dangerous results it was negligent in them or, in other words, a breach of their duty towards the Plaintiff to allow anything whatsoever to fall or slip by accident into the molten material.  In fact the hardening process operated in this room consisted of dipping objects into this very material and nobody suggested that there was any danger in that, so that the learned Judge must have considered that no negligence was involved in purposely putting objects not known to be dangerous into the cauldron.

In effect the learned Judge's finding comes to this, that the Defendants were insurers of the Plaintiff's safety. Now, it may very well be that it is desirable that it should be the law that the employer is such an insurer and that an injury which, without the employee's fault, happens to him in the course of his employment is the responsibility of his employer. I believe this to be the law in some parts of the United States of America and it is the principle lying behind the workmen's compensation code now abandoned, but, in my judgment, it is not justifiable to import the doctrine of Rylands v. Fletcher into this branch of the English law. We ought, in my opinion, to start with the premise that the criterion in English law is foreseeability. I take it that whether the Wagon Mound case is or is not binding on this Court we ought to treat it as the law. Our enquiry must, therefore, be whether the result of this hard-board cover slipping into the cauldron, which we know now to be inevitably an explosion, was a thing reasonably foreseeable at the time when it happened.  It is acknowledged by the Respondent that no-one in the employer's service knew of the likelihood of such an event, and it is clear that no-one in the room at the time thought of any dangerous result. There was a striking piece of evidence of the two men who went and looked over the edge of the cauldron to see where the piece of board had gone. Neither they, nor anyone else, thought they were doing anything risky.

The Respondent's argument most persuasively urged by Mr James rested, as I understood it, on admissions made that, if this lid had been dropped into the cauldron with sufficient force to cause the molten material to splash over the edge, that would not have been an act of negligence or carelessness for which the employers might be vicariously responsible. Reliance was put upon the case of Hughes v. Lord Advocate, where the exact consequences of the lamp overturning were not foreseen, but it was foreseeable that if the manhole were left unguarded boys would enter and tamper with the lamp and it was not unlikely that serious burns might ensue for the boy. Their Lordships' House distinguished the Wagon Mound case on the ground that the damage which ensued though differing in degree was the same in kind as that which was foreseeable. So it is said here that a splash causing burns was foreseeable and that this explosion was really only a magnified splash which also caused burns and that, therefore, we ought to follow Hughes v. Lord Advocate and hold the Appellants liable. I cannot accept this. In my opinion, the damage here was of an entirely different kind from the foreseeable splash. Indeed, the evidence showed that any disturbance of the material resulting from the immersion of the hard-board was over an appreciable time before the explosion happened. This latter was caused by the disintegration of the hard-board under the great heat to which it was subjected and the consequent release of the moisture enclosed within it. This had nothing to do with the agitation caused by the dropping of the board into the cyanide. I am of opinion that it would be wrong on these facts to make another inroad on the doctrine of foreseeability which seems to me to be a satisfactory solvent of this type of difficulty.

I would allow the appeal. 

LORD JUSTICE DIPLOCK: About two years before the accident the Defendants, who are the Plaintiff's employers, purchased for the purpose of their business from a reputable manufacturer of asbestos cement an asbestos cement cover for a cyanide bath heat treatment furnace, in which a cyanide salt was raised to a temperature of 800 degrees Centigrade, at which temperature it became a somewhat viscous liquid. They did so on the recommendation of the reputable manufacturers of the furnace itself. The cover was of a type designed for use with the furnace and had been widely so used in the trade for upwards of 20 years. The use of a cover made of this material presents, it is now known, two risks of injury to persons in the vicinity of the furnace. The first risk, which it shares with any other solid object of similar weight and size, is that if it is allowed to drop on to the hot liquid in the bath with sufficient momentum it may cause the liquid to splash on to persons within about one foot from the bath and injure them by burning. The second risk is that if it becomes immersed in a liquid, the temperature of which exceeds 500 degrees Centigrade, it will disintegrate and cause an under-surface explosion which will eject the liquid from the bath over a wide area and may cause injury by burning to persons within that area.

The former risk was well-known (that was foreseeable) at the time of the accident; but it did not happen. It was the second risk which happened and caused the Plaintiff damage by burning. The crucial finding by the learned Judge, in a characteristically laconic Judgment, was that this was not a risk of which the Defendants at the time of the accident knew, or ought to have known. This finding, which was justified by the evidence and has not been assailed in this appeal, would appear to lead logically to the conclusion that in causing, or failing to prevent, the immersion of the cover in the liquid, the Defendants, by their servants, were in breach of no duty of care owed to the Plaintiff, for this was not an act or omission which they could reasonably foresee was likely to cause him damage.

The learned Judge, nevertheless, found the Defendants liable. His ratio decidendi, which was somewhat elliptically expressed can, I think, be fairly expanded into the following findings of fact and propositions of law:  (1) It was common knowledge that some substances (viz. those which were chemically unstable at 800 degrees and upon disintegration at that temperature formed, among other things, a gas) would cause an explosion upon immersion in the liquid cyanide.  (2) It was common knowledge that other substances (viz. those which were chemically inert at 800 degrees) would not cause an explosion upon immersion in the liquid cyanide.  (3) Therefore, the Defendants were under a duty to all persons whom they ought reasonably to foresee might be within the area within which they would be likely to sustain damage if an explosion occurred to take every possible precaution to see that nothing was immersed in the liquid cyanide which in fact, whether or not they knew or ought to have known it, could cause an explosion.

(4) The Plaintiff was a person whom the Defendants ought reasonably to have foreseen might be within the area which he would be likely to sustain damage if an explosion occurred.

(5) The Defendants did not take every possible precaution to ensure that the cover was not immersed in the liquid cyanide. They used it in a place where it might inadvertently be caused to fall into the liquid cyanide and become immersed therein. (6) One of the Defendants' servants in fact inadvertently caused the cover to fall into the liquid cyanide and become immersed therein, thereby causing an explosion whereby the Plaintiff sustained damage.  (7) Therefore, the damage was the result of the Defendants' breach of the duty which they owed to the Plaintiff.

With great respect the fallacy in this reasoning appears to me to lie in the proposition of law in paragraph (3).  It means, in effect, that the Defendants could only use the furnace at their peril, for the whole purpose of its use was to immerse in it substances which were chemically inert at 800 degrees. If the learned Judge's proposition is correct the mere fact of an explosion consequent upon the immersion of some substance in the liquid would render the Defendants liable, however meticulous the care they had taken to see that the substance was chemically inert at 800 degrees, for the fact of the explosion would show that the substance "could" cause one.

This is to impose on the Defendants a "strict liability" analogous to the duty to prevent a dangerous thing escaping from his hand which, under the rule laid down in Rylands v. Fletcher, 1868 Law Reports, 3 House of Lords, page 330, is owed by an occupier of land to persons who are likely to be injured by its escape. An attempt to import into the general law of negligence a similar strict liability upon persons carrying on an ultra-hazardous activity was made in Read v. J. Lyons & Co. Ltd., 1947 Appeal Cases, page 156, and was negatived by the House of Lords.

There is no room to-day for mystique in the law of negligence.  It is the application of common morality and common sense to the activities of the common man. He must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which he can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure his neighbour; but he need do no more than this. If the act which he does is not one which he could, if he thought about it, reasonably foresee would injure his neighbour it matters not whether he does it intentionally or inadvertently. The learned Judge's finding, uncontested on appeal, that in the state of knowledge as it was at the time of the accident the Defendants could not reasonably have foreseen that the immersion of the asbestos cement cover in the liquid would be likely to injure anyone must lead to the conclusion that they would have been under no liability to the Plaintiff if they had intentionally immersed the cover in the liquid. The fact that it was done inadvertently cannot create any liability, for the immersion of the cover was not an act which they were under any duty to take any care to avoid.

It was, however, argued by Mr James for the Appellant that, even though the risk of explosion upon immersion of the cover was not one which the Defendants could reasonably foresee, the Plaintiff can, nevertheless, recover because one of the Defendants' servants inadvertently either knocked the cover into the liquid or allowed it to slip in, thus giving rise to a foreseeable risk of splashing the hot liquid on to the Plaintiff and injuring him by burning. The actual damage sustained by the Plaintiff was damage of the same kind, that is by burning, as could be foreseen as likely to result from knocking the cover into the liquid or allowing it to slip in, and Mr James contended that this was sufficient to impose a duty on the Defendants owed to the Plaintiff to take reasonable care to avoid knocking the cover into the liquid, or allowing it to slip in, and that the Plaintiff's damage flowed from their breach of this duty. Such a proposition might, before The Wagon Mound, have been supported by In re Polemis, 1921 3 King's Bench, page 560. But the decision of the Court of Appeal is no longer law; and Mr James relied principally on Hughes v. Lord Advocate, a case in which the House of Lords treated The Wagon Mound as correctly stating the law, but distinguished it on the facts. I do not think that this authority assists him.  In Hughes v. Lord Advocate the breach of duty by the defendant which was relied upon was his omission to guard a dangerous allurement to children which was liable to cause them injury (inter alia) by burning. The infant plaintiff, to whom the duty was owed, was allured and was injured by burning, although the particular concatenation of circumstances which resulted in his burns being more serious than they would have been expected to be could not reasonably have been foreseen. But they were the direct consequence of the defendant's breach of duty and of the same kind as could reasonably have been foreseen, although of unforeseen gravity. But in the present case the Defendants' duty owed to the Plaintiff in relation to the only foreseeable risk, that is of splashing, was to take reasonable care to avoid knocking the cover into the liquid or allowing it to slip in in such a way as to cause a splash which would injure the Plaintiff. Failure to avoid knocking it into the liquid, or allowing it to slip in, was of itself no breach of duty to the Plaintiff. It is not clear on the evidence whether the dropping of the cover on to the liquid caused any splash at all. The Judge made no finding on this. The reasoning in his Judgment is not sufficiently explicit to make it clear whether the point argued by Mr James, with which I am now dealing, formed part of his ratio decidendi, though some of his observations in the course of the hearing suggest that it was not. However that may be, it is incontrovertible that, even if there was some slight splash when the cover fell on to the liquid, the Plaintiff was untouched by it and it caused him no injury. There was thus, in the circumstances of this case, no breach of duty to the Plaintiff involved in inadvertently knocking the cover into the liquid or inadvertently allowing it to slip in.

For these reasons I would accordingly allow this appeal.

MR GIBBENS: My Lord, I ask that the appeal be allowed,

Judgment entered for the Defendants, and that the costs of this appeal should follow.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Is the Plaintiff legally aided?

MR GIBBENS: No, my Lord; it is a Union case.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Mr Colston, what do you say about costs?

MR C. COLSTON (for Mr James): My Lord, this case was started in the County Court by the Plaintiff, as your Lordship will know. It was then transferred to the High Court at the instigation of the Defendant Appellants in this case. I would only say this, that your Lordship may consider that it would be proper that the costs in the Court below should be on the County Court scale.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN:  On the County Court scale up to the date of transfer. Do you object to the transfer of the case to the High Court?

MR COLSTON: Yes, my Lord.  It was transferred at the instigation of the Appellants, because this case is in the nature of a test case for them.  I understand that other people were injured in this same accident, my Lord. The result of those claims depends upon the Judgment in this case.

LORD JUSTICE DIPLOCK: This is a test case for both sides.

MR COLSTON: Yes, my Lord.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: You say that the Defendants wanted the matter pursued in the High Court.

MR COLSTON: Yes, my Lord.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: What do you say about that, Mr Gibbens? What Order did the learned Judge make?

MR GIBBENS: My Lord, he made an Order for costs in favour of the Plaintiff on the High Court scale after the date of transfer. Of course, we could not object to that. They asked for it. My Lord, the tables are being turned on me now. The sole question at issue is whether it was reasonable for this case to be transferred to the High Court as the County Court Act provides.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Does the County Court Act give any circumstances which should make it proper to transfer?

MR GIBBENS: My Lord, under the County Court Act the Judge may transfer the case to the High Court if it involves questions of law or fact of sufficient importance. It was under that section that we applied to the County Court Judge and had it transferred.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: The actual amount involved here is very small.

MR GIBBENS: Yes, that is why this case was brought in the County Court. I only would observe that the other cases were made to mark time, so that this case could be decided first, by those acting for the various Plaintiffs. My Lord, we were not satisfied that it should be dealt with on that basis. We wanted a High Court decision for that, because there is one fatal accident case. It was, therefore, reasonable, and I would submit the Judgments of your Lordships have made it apparent, to regard this case as of such importance as to justify High Court trial.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: It was not a matter altogether easy, because we reserved Judgment.

MR GIBBENS: My Lord, the issue of fact was out of all

proportion to the monetary issue in this particular instance. As Lord Justice Diplock said it is a test case for both sides. We were not prepared to have it decided in the County Court.

LORD JUSTICE DIPLOCK: The cases are all Union cases, are they?

MR GIBBENS: Yes, my Lord.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Are they High Court or County Court cases?

MR GIBBENS: My Lord, they are High Court cases. I understand that they are being conducted by other Solicitors, but by the same Union.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: We do not see why we should not apply the same rules as were applied by the Judge below. Any costs should be High Court costs when the matter was in the High Court.

MR COLSTON: If your Lordship pleases.

MR GIBBENS: There is one small matter I ask leave to mention.

On the transfer of the case to the High Court the Registrar made an Order as required of him that the Defendants should give security for costs in the sum of £450 as paid in by the Defendants under that Order. The learned Judge did mention, after giving Judgment, that that sum should be paid out to the Defendants, but by some oversight it was not included in the Judgment as drawn up. So it would be the most simple course if I were to ask your Lordships now for an Order that that sum be paid out.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Unless it appears on the Judgment Schedule. They must have one, yes. There is no suggestion that you are not entitled to have it?

MR GIBBENS: No, my Lord. My learned friend Mr Stephen Brown for the Plaintiff before the learned Judge agreed that I should have it out, even though there was a stay of execution.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Very well. There will be an Order for payment out of the money in Court.

MR GIBBENS: I am much obliged, my Lord.


]
[

LORD PEARCE (read by Lord Justice Harman): The Defendants appeal from a Judgment of Mr Justice Stable awarding to the Plaintiff £150 damages for personal injuries suffered in an accident which occurred during the Plaintiff's employment at the Defendants' factory.

The scene of the accident was the heat-treatment department to which the Plaintiff had gone for the purpose of delivering a message to the foreman. In that department there stood two baths or cauldrons 3ft. 10ins. high and 3ft. 4ins. square. They had thick walls intended to resist great heat so that the internal area of each bath was only 18 by 31 inches.  Into those baths was placed sodium cyanide powder. Two upright electrodes, lowered by chains into the bath, passed an electric current through the powder which became a molten liquid and attained the very great heat of 800 degrees Centigrade, eight times the heat of boiling water. The process consisted of subjecting metal parts to heat by immersing them in the liquid. In order to conserve the heat in each bath there were two loose covers which rested side by side over it. These covers were made of a compressed compound of asbestos and cement known as Sindanyo which, until this accident occurred, was thought to be a safe and suitable material for such a purpose. It had been so used in England and the United States for over 20 years. The Defendants bought the covers for the particular purpose from the reputable manufacturers of the baths.

Immediately before the accident the electrodes in the bath were being changed by a workman standing on the side of the bath. He, or some other of the four workmen in the vicinity, must have inadvertently knocked the loose asbestos cement cover so that it slid into the bath and disappeared from sight beneath the molten liquid. Nobody regarded this as a dangerous matter or withdrew from the neighbourhood of the bath. Two men actually moved closer to peer into the bath and see what had happened. After an interval, which one witness put at one minute and another at two minutes, the molten liquid erupted from the bath, injuring the bystanders by its great heat and setting fire to objects on which it fell. The Plaintiff was at that moment standing by the side of the foreman not far from the bath.

The reason for the eruption was discovered by experiments which Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd., who had installed similar covers, carried out as a result of this accident.  It then appeared that whenever any cover made of compound asbestos cement was immersed in the molten liquid and subjected to a temperature of over 500 degrees it created such an eruption. At that temperature the compound, which contains hydrogen and oxygen, undergoes a chemical change which either creates or releases water. This water turns to steam and produces an explosion or eruption which throws some of the hot molten liquid out of the bath, Thus the immersion of the cover in the bath was inevitably followed by an eruption of liquid from the bath. The same result would occur if something that contained actual moisture in it (as opposed to what might be called the potential moisture which is thus precipitated by great heat) was immersed; if, for instance, this cover, which is porous and capable of holding water, had been immersed when wet. But it was not suggested that this particular cover contained actual moisture at the time of the accident, since it had been standing in the hot room for some days beforehand.

The learned Judge held that, as the evidence showed, the Defendants did not appreciate that the immersion of the cover in the liquid would produce an explosion and he held that they were not to blame for not appreciating it. He continued:  

"The result simply is this that if, for example, the bath contained an amount of this substance and it exploded whilst it was being used in the ordinary way, I think the Defendants would have escaped liability". 

That is clearly right.

He went on to hold, however, that it must have been common knowledge that there were substances which, if dropped into such immense heat, would produce an explosion, although not all substances would do so; and that, therefore, "every possible precaution should be taken to see that nothing was dropped into the bath which could have that result". He therefore held that the inadvertence of one of the Defendants' workmen in upsetting the cover into the bath was "negligent in the true sense of the word; that is to say, it constituted an actionable wrong".

No authorities were cited to the learned Judge at the trial and at that date, we are told, the Judgment of the Privy Council in the Wagon Mound, reported in 1961 Appeal Cases, 388, had not yet been reported.  In the light of that important case which gave such a different complexion to cases where seemingly harmless acts result in unforeseeable calamities, I think that the learned Judge, if it had been called to his attention in the case, might have reached a different conclusion. In the Wagon Mound case the Board held that Re Polemis should no longer be regarded as good law and that the essential factor in determining liability for the consequences of a tortious act of negligence is whether the damage is of such a kind as the reasonable man should have foreseen. "After the event", said Lord Simonds giving the Judgment of the Board, at page 424, "even a fool is wise. But it is not the hindsight of a fool; it is the foresight of the reasonable man which alone can determine responsibility".

In the present case the evidence showed that nobody supposed that an asbestos cement cover could not safely be immersed in the bath. The learned Judge took the view, which Mr James concedes was correct, that if the Defendants had deliberately immersed this cover in the bath as part of the normal process, they could not have been held liable for the resulting explosion. The fact that they inadvertently knocked it into the bath cannot of itself convert into negligence that which they were entitled to do deliberately. In the then state of their knowledge, for which the learned Judge, rightly on the evidence, held them in no way to blame, the accident was not foreseeable. In spite of Mr James' able argument I am of opinion that they cannot, therefore, be held liable for negligence.

Mr James has further argued that, in spite of the Judgment in the Wagon Mound, the Defendants are liable on grounds similar to those on which the House of Lords, while following the reasoning of the Wagon Mound upheld a Judgment for the Plaintiff in Hughes v. Lord Advocate, reported in 1963 2 Weekly Law Reports, 779. In that case an allurement to children in the roadway constituted by a red lamp, a hole in the ground and a tarpaulin tent caused an unforeseeable explosion and injury by burns. Their Lordships held, however, that although the exact chain of events was unforeseeable, the type of accident and the injuries "though perhaps different in degree, did not differ in kind from injuries which might have resulted from an accident of a foreseeable nature".  (See Lord Reid's Speech at page 781). 

"Of course the pursuer has to prove that the defender's fault caused the accident and there could be a case where the intrusion of a new and unexpected factor could be regarded as the cause of the accident rather than the fault of the defender. But that is not this case. The cause of this accident was a known source of danger, the lamp, but it behaved in an unpredictable way". 

He concludes with these words:  

"This accident was caused by a known source of danger but caused in a way which could not have been foreseen and in my judgment that affords no defence".

In the present case the potential eruptive qualities of the covers when immersed in great heat were not suspected and they were not a known source of danger, but Mr James argues that the cause of injury was the escape of the hot liquid from the bath, and that injury through the escape of liquid from the bath by splashing was foreseeable. The evidence showed that splashes caused by sudden immersion, whether of the metal objects for which it was intended or any other extraneous object, were a foreseeable danger which should be carefully avoided. The falling cover might have ejected the liquid by a splash and in the result it did eject the liquid, though in a more dramatic fashion. Therefore, he argues, the actual accident was merely a variant of foreseeable accidents by splashing. It is clear, however, both by inference and by one explicit observation, that the learned Judge regarded splashes as being in quite a different category. Moreover, according to the evidence it seems that the cover never did create a splash: it appears to have slid into the liquid at an angle of some 45 degrees and dived obliquely downwards. Further, it seems somewhat doubtful whether the cover falling only from a height of 4 or 6 inches, which was the difference in level between the liquid and the sides, could have splashed any liquid outside the bath. And when (if ever) the Plaintiff was in the area in which he could be hit by a mere splash (apparently the liquid being heavy, if splashed, would not travel further than a foot from the bath) the cover had already slid into the liquid without splashing. Indeed, it seems from the Plaintiff's evidence that when he first came on to the scene the cover was already half in and half out of the liquid. On broader grounds, however, it would be quite unrealistic to describe this accident as a variant of the perils from splashing. The cause of the accident, to quote Lord Reid's words, was "the intrusion of a new and unexpected factor". There was an eruption due to chemical changes underneath the surface of the liquid as opposed to a splash caused by displacement from bodies falling on to its surface.  In my judgment, the reasoning in Hughes v. Lord Advocate cannot be extended far enough to cover this case.

I have great sympathy with the Plaintiff who suffered injury through no fault of his own. But, in my judgment, the Defendants cannot, on the evidence, be held guilty of negligence, and I would accordingly allow the appeal and enter Judgment for the Defendants. 

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: The learned Judge appears to have decided this case in favour of the Plaintiff upon the footing that having regarded to the peril engendered by the presence in the cauldron of this mass of molten material and to the knowledge which the Defendants had that certain substances might produce dangerous results it was negligent in them or, in other words, a breach of their duty towards the Plaintiff to allow anything whatsoever to fall or slip by accident into the molten material.  In fact the hardening process operated in this room consisted of dipping objects into this very material and nobody suggested that there was any danger in that, so that the learned Judge must have considered that no negligence was involved in purposely putting objects not known to be dangerous into the cauldron.

In effect the learned Judge's finding comes to this, that the Defendants were insurers of the Plaintiff's safety. Now, it may very well be that it is desirable that it should be the law that the employer is such an insurer and that an injury which, without the employee's fault, happens to him in the course of his employment is the responsibility of his employer. I believe this to be the law in some parts of the United States of America and it is the principle lying behind the workmen's compensation code now abandoned, but, in my judgment, it is not justifiable to import the doctrine of Rylands v. Fletcher into this branch of the English law. We ought, in my opinion, to start with the premise that the criterion in English law is foreseeability. I take it that whether the Wagon Mound case is or is not binding on this Court we ought to treat it as the law. Our enquiry must, therefore, be whether the result of this hard-board cover slipping into the cauldron, which we know now to be inevitably an explosion, was a thing reasonably foreseeable at the time when it happened.  It is acknowledged by the Respondent that no-one in the employer's service knew of the likelihood of such an event, and it is clear that no-one in the room at the time thought of any dangerous result. There was a striking piece of evidence of the two men who went and looked over the edge of the cauldron to see where the piece of board had gone. Neither they, nor anyone else, thought they were doing anything risky.

The Respondent's argument most persuasively urged by Mr James rested, as I understood it, on admissions made that, if this lid had been dropped into the cauldron with sufficient force to cause the molten material to splash over the edge, that would not have been an act of negligence or carelessness for which the employers might be vicariously responsible. Reliance was put upon the case of Hughes v. Lord Advocate, where the exact consequences of the lamp overturning were not foreseen, but it was foreseeable that if the manhole were left unguarded boys would enter and tamper with the lamp and it was not unlikely that serious burns might ensue for the boy. Their Lordships' House distinguished the Wagon Mound case on the ground that the damage which ensued though differing in degree was the same in kind as that which was foreseeable. So it is said here that a splash causing burns was foreseeable and that this explosion was really only a magnified splash which also caused burns and that, therefore, we ought to follow Hughes v. Lord Advocate and hold the Appellants liable. I cannot accept this. In my opinion, the damage here was of an entirely different kind from the foreseeable splash. Indeed, the evidence showed that any disturbance of the material resulting from the immersion of the hard-board was over an appreciable time before the explosion happened. This latter was caused by the disintegration of the hard-board under the great heat to which it was subjected and the consequent release of the moisture enclosed within it. This had nothing to do with the agitation caused by the dropping of the board into the cyanide. I am of opinion that it would be wrong on these facts to make another inroad on the doctrine of foreseeability which seems to me to be a satisfactory solvent of this type of difficulty.

I would allow the appeal. 

LORD JUSTICE DIPLOCK: About two years before the accident the Defendants, who are the Plaintiff's employers, purchased for the purpose of their business from a reputable manufacturer of asbestos cement an asbestos cement cover for a cyanide bath heat treatment furnace, in which a cyanide salt was raised to a temperature of 800 degrees Centigrade, at which temperature it became a somewhat viscous liquid. They did so on the recommendation of the reputable manufacturers of the furnace itself. The cover was of a type designed for use with the furnace and had been widely so used in the trade for upwards of 20 years. The use of a cover made of this material presents, it is now known, two risks of injury to persons in the vicinity of the furnace. The first risk, which it shares with any other solid object of similar weight and size, is that if it is allowed to drop on to the hot liquid in the bath with sufficient momentum it may cause the liquid to splash on to persons within about one foot from the bath and injure them by burning. The second risk is that if it becomes immersed in a liquid, the temperature of which exceeds 500 degrees Centigrade, it will disintegrate and cause an under-surface explosion which will eject the liquid from the bath over a wide area and may cause injury by burning to persons within that area.

The former risk was well-known (that was foreseeable) at the time of the accident; but it did not happen. It was the second risk which happened and caused the Plaintiff damage by burning. The crucial finding by the learned Judge, in a characteristically laconic Judgment, was that this was not a risk of which the Defendants at the time of the accident knew, or ought to have known. This finding, which was justified by the evidence and has not been assailed in this appeal, would appear to lead logically to the conclusion that in causing, or failing to prevent, the immersion of the cover in the liquid, the Defendants, by their servants, were in breach of no duty of care owed to the Plaintiff, for this was not an act or omission which they could reasonably foresee was likely to cause him damage.

The learned Judge, nevertheless, found the Defendants liable. His ratio decidendi, which was somewhat elliptically expressed can, I think, be fairly expanded into the following findings of fact and propositions of law:  (1) It was common knowledge that some substances (viz. those which were chemically unstable at 800 degrees and upon disintegration at that temperature formed, among other things, a gas) would cause an explosion upon immersion in the liquid cyanide.  (2) It was common knowledge that other substances (viz. those which were chemically inert at 800 degrees) would not cause an explosion upon immersion in the liquid cyanide.  (3) Therefore, the Defendants were under a duty to all persons whom they ought reasonably to foresee might be within the area within which they would be likely to sustain damage if an explosion occurred to take every possible precaution to see that nothing was immersed in the liquid cyanide which in fact, whether or not they knew or ought to have known it, could cause an explosion.

(4) The Plaintiff was a person whom the Defendants ought reasonably to have foreseen might be within the area which he would be likely to sustain damage if an explosion occurred.

(5) The Defendants did not take every possible precaution to ensure that the cover was not immersed in the liquid cyanide. They used it in a place where it might inadvertently be caused to fall into the liquid cyanide and become immersed therein. (6) One of the Defendants' servants in fact inadvertently caused the cover to fall into the liquid cyanide and become immersed therein, thereby causing an explosion whereby the Plaintiff sustained damage.  (7) Therefore, the damage was the result of the Defendants' breach of the duty which they owed to the Plaintiff.

With great respect the fallacy in this reasoning appears to me to lie in the proposition of law in paragraph (3).  It means, in effect, that the Defendants could only use the furnace at their peril, for the whole purpose of its use was to immerse in it substances which were chemically inert at 800 degrees. If the learned Judge's proposition is correct the mere fact of an explosion consequent upon the immersion of some substance in the liquid would render the Defendants liable, however meticulous the care they had taken to see that the substance was chemically inert at 800 degrees, for the fact of the explosion would show that the substance "could" cause one.

This is to impose on the Defendants a "strict liability" analogous to the duty to prevent a dangerous thing escaping from his hand which, under the rule laid down in Rylands v. Fletcher, 1868 Law Reports, 3 House of Lords, page 330, is owed by an occupier of land to persons who are likely to be injured by its escape. An attempt to import into the general law of negligence a similar strict liability upon persons carrying on an ultra-hazardous activity was made in Read v. J. Lyons & Co. Ltd., 1947 Appeal Cases, page 156, and was negatived by the House of Lords.

There is no room to-day for mystique in the law of negligence.  It is the application of common morality and common sense to the activities of the common man. He must take reasonable care to avoid acts or omissions which he can reasonably foresee would be likely to injure his neighbour; but he need do no more than this. If the act which he does is not one which he could, if he thought about it, reasonably foresee would injure his neighbour it matters not whether he does it intentionally or inadvertently. The learned Judge's finding, uncontested on appeal, that in the state of knowledge as it was at the time of the accident the Defendants could not reasonably have foreseen that the immersion of the asbestos cement cover in the liquid would be likely to injure anyone must lead to the conclusion that they would have been under no liability to the Plaintiff if they had intentionally immersed the cover in the liquid. The fact that it was done inadvertently cannot create any liability, for the immersion of the cover was not an act which they were under any duty to take any care to avoid.

It was, however, argued by Mr James for the Appellant that, even though the risk of explosion upon immersion of the cover was not one which the Defendants could reasonably foresee, the Plaintiff can, nevertheless, recover because one of the Defendants' servants inadvertently either knocked the cover into the liquid or allowed it to slip in, thus giving rise to a foreseeable risk of splashing the hot liquid on to the Plaintiff and injuring him by burning. The actual damage sustained by the Plaintiff was damage of the same kind, that is by burning, as could be foreseen as likely to result from knocking the cover into the liquid or allowing it to slip in, and Mr James contended that this was sufficient to impose a duty on the Defendants owed to the Plaintiff to take reasonable care to avoid knocking the cover into the liquid, or allowing it to slip in, and that the Plaintiff's damage flowed from their breach of this duty. Such a proposition might, before The Wagon Mound, have been supported by In re Polemis, 1921 3 King's Bench, page 560. But the decision of the Court of Appeal is no longer law; and Mr James relied principally on Hughes v. Lord Advocate, a case in which the House of Lords treated The Wagon Mound as correctly stating the law, but distinguished it on the facts. I do not think that this authority assists him.  In Hughes v. Lord Advocate the breach of duty by the defendant which was relied upon was his omission to guard a dangerous allurement to children which was liable to cause them injury (inter alia) by burning. The infant plaintiff, to whom the duty was owed, was allured and was injured by burning, although the particular concatenation of circumstances which resulted in his burns being more serious than they would have been expected to be could not reasonably have been foreseen. But they were the direct consequence of the defendant's breach of duty and of the same kind as could reasonably have been foreseen, although of unforeseen gravity. But in the present case the Defendants' duty owed to the Plaintiff in relation to the only foreseeable risk, that is of splashing, was to take reasonable care to avoid knocking the cover into the liquid or allowing it to slip in in such a way as to cause a splash which would injure the Plaintiff. Failure to avoid knocking it into the liquid, or allowing it to slip in, was of itself no breach of duty to the Plaintiff. It is not clear on the evidence whether the dropping of the cover on to the liquid caused any splash at all. The Judge made no finding on this. The reasoning in his Judgment is not sufficiently explicit to make it clear whether the point argued by Mr James, with which I am now dealing, formed part of his ratio decidendi, though some of his observations in the course of the hearing suggest that it was not. However that may be, it is incontrovertible that, even if there was some slight splash when the cover fell on to the liquid, the Plaintiff was untouched by it and it caused him no injury. There was thus, in the circumstances of this case, no breach of duty to the Plaintiff involved in inadvertently knocking the cover into the liquid or inadvertently allowing it to slip in.

For these reasons I would accordingly allow this appeal.

MR GIBBENS: My Lord, I ask that the appeal be allowed,

Judgment entered for the Defendants, and that the costs of this appeal should follow.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Is the Plaintiff legally aided?

MR GIBBENS: No, my Lord; it is a Union case.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Mr Colston, what do you say about costs?

MR C. COLSTON (for Mr James): My Lord, this case was started in the County Court by the Plaintiff, as your Lordship will know. It was then transferred to the High Court at the instigation of the Defendant Appellants in this case. I would only say this, that your Lordship may consider that it would be proper that the costs in the Court below should be on the County Court scale.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN:  On the County Court scale up to the date of transfer. Do you object to the transfer of the case to the High Court?

MR COLSTON: Yes, my Lord.  It was transferred at the instigation of the Appellants, because this case is in the nature of a test case for them.  I understand that other people were injured in this same accident, my Lord. The result of those claims depends upon the Judgment in this case.

LORD JUSTICE DIPLOCK: This is a test case for both sides.

MR COLSTON: Yes, my Lord.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: You say that the Defendants wanted the matter pursued in the High Court.

MR COLSTON: Yes, my Lord.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: What do you say about that, Mr Gibbens? What Order did the learned Judge make?

MR GIBBENS: My Lord, he made an Order for costs in favour of the Plaintiff on the High Court scale after the date of transfer. Of course, we could not object to that. They asked for it. My Lord, the tables are being turned on me now. The sole question at issue is whether it was reasonable for this case to be transferred to the High Court as the County Court Act provides.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Does the County Court Act give any circumstances which should make it proper to transfer?

MR GIBBENS: My Lord, under the County Court Act the Judge may transfer the case to the High Court if it involves questions of law or fact of sufficient importance. It was under that section that we applied to the County Court Judge and had it transferred.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: The actual amount involved here is very small.

MR GIBBENS: Yes, that is why this case was brought in the County Court. I only would observe that the other cases were made to mark time, so that this case could be decided first, by those acting for the various Plaintiffs. My Lord, we were not satisfied that it should be dealt with on that basis. We wanted a High Court decision for that, because there is one fatal accident case. It was, therefore, reasonable, and I would submit the Judgments of your Lordships have made it apparent, to regard this case as of such importance as to justify High Court trial.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: It was not a matter altogether easy, because we reserved Judgment.

MR GIBBENS: My Lord, the issue of fact was out of all

proportion to the monetary issue in this particular instance. As Lord Justice Diplock said it is a test case for both sides. We were not prepared to have it decided in the County Court.

LORD JUSTICE DIPLOCK: The cases are all Union cases, are they?

MR GIBBENS: Yes, my Lord.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Are they High Court or County Court cases?

MR GIBBENS: My Lord, they are High Court cases. I understand that they are being conducted by other Solicitors, but by the same Union.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: We do not see why we should not apply the same rules as were applied by the Judge below. Any costs should be High Court costs when the matter was in the High Court.

MR COLSTON: If your Lordship pleases.

MR GIBBENS: There is one small matter I ask leave to mention.

On the transfer of the case to the High Court the Registrar made an Order as required of him that the Defendants should give security for costs in the sum of £450 as paid in by the Defendants under that Order. The learned Judge did mention, after giving Judgment, that that sum should be paid out to the Defendants, but by some oversight it was not included in the Judgment as drawn up. So it would be the most simple course if I were to ask your Lordships now for an Order that that sum be paid out.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Unless it appears on the Judgment Schedule. They must have one, yes. There is no suggestion that you are not entitled to have it?

MR GIBBENS: No, my Lord. My learned friend Mr Stephen Brown for the Plaintiff before the learned Judge agreed that I should have it out, even though there was a stay of execution.

LORD JUSTICE HARMAN: Very well. There will be an Order for payment out of the money in Court.

MR GIBBENS: I am much obliged, my Lord.


]
[

LORD JUSTICE SELLERS:  This appeal raises a primary point in the law of contract.  The question has arisen whether a contract which is voidable by one party can in any circumstances be terminated by that party without his rescission being communicated to the other party.

Lord Denning, Master of the Rolls, from whom this appeal comes from a trial in the Queen's Bench, has held in the circumstances of this case that there can be rescission without communication where the seller of a motor car who admittedly had the right to rescind the contract of sale on the ground of fraudulent misrepresentation terminated the contract by an unequivocal act of election which demonstrated clearly that he had elected to rescind it and to be no longer bound by it.

The general rule, no doubt, is that where a party is entitled to rescind a contract and wishes to do so the contract subsists until the opposing party is informed that the contract has been terminated.  The difficulty of the seller in this case was that, when he learnt of the fraud and therefore ascertained his right to terminate the bargain, he could not without considerable delay find either the fraudulent buyer or the car which had been sold.  Such circumstances would not appear to be so rare in transactions in motor cars (or horses in earlier days) that they would not, it might be thought, have given rise to litigation and an authoritative decision, but it seems that over the years the point in issue has not been decided in any reported case in similar or comparable circumstances.

The case was heard on an agreed statement of facts and of issues arising out of a sheriff's interpleader, and some oral evidence was called.  Briefly, Mr. Caldwell, the defendant in this interpleader, owned a Jaguar motor car which was obtained from him by one Norris, who took the car away from the defendant's house on Tuesday evening, the 12th January, 1960, having induced the owner to sell it for £975, of which £l0 in cash had been paid as a deposit two days before and for which a cheque for £965 was handed over.  As soon as the bank in Brighton on which the cheque was drawn opened at 10 a.m. on the 13th January, Mr. Caldwell discovered that the cheque was worthless and that he had been deceived and defrauded.  The car had been obtained by false pretences.  A Hillman car was also left as security but the buyer had no title in it to transfer to Mr. Caldwell and it too was worthless to him.  It was agreed that Norris acquired a voidable title to the car.  Some time on the 13th January Norris sold and delivered the Jaguar to Motobella Company, Limited, and it was further agreed that Motobella had notice of the defect in title and took the vehicle with no better title than that previously vested in Norris.  On the 15th January Motobella Company Ltd., sold the car to G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd., who purported to hire it to one Alfred Harry Knowles, who would appear to have been a fictitious hirer.  On the 13th August, 1960, the car was sold to the plaintiffs on this interpleader issue, Car & Universal Finance Company, Ltd., another company dealing in hire purchase finance.  Mr. Caldwell's present claim to the car is based on what he did on the 13th January, 1960, which it is alleged terminated the contract of sale of the previous evening and restored the title in the car to him.

This is what he did.  As soon as he learnt from the bank manager that the cheque in payment for the car could not be met and that there had been a similar transaction previously and that the police were looking for Norris, Mr. Caldwell went at once to the police.  The police produced a photograph of Norris, whom Mr. Caldwell identified as the man to whom he had sold his car.  A warrant was out for the arrest of this man in the name of Rowley. His house had been watched and endeavours had been made to find him. Through the police and the organisation of the Automobile Association Mr. Caldwell made every endeavour to find and recover the car forthwith and to discover the absconding and elusive Norris.  Mr. Caldwell clearly wished to terminate the contract of sale and take back the car and acted as far as he could to that end.

The Jaguar was found on the 20th January when it was being driven by a director of Motobella Company, Ltd., who had purported to sell it to the G. & C. Finance Corporation on the 15th January for hire to one Knowles.  He claimed that his company had bought it and it was their property, but the claim was not persisted in when the matter came to trial.  The Motobella Company Ltd. were sued by Mr. Caldwell for the return of the car and when the action was called on it was not defended and Mr. Caldwell obtained judgment. When he sought to take the car under the judgment the present plaintiffs on the interpleader issue claimed it as theirs.  They had the car transferred to them on the 13th August, 1960, and thereafter they seem to have hired it out.

By reason of the transaction completed on the 12th January, 1960, Norris, otherwise Rowley, obtained the property in the car in question.  Another man was with Norris, but as he was apparently the servant or agent of Norris no question arises with regard to him.

The sole question on this part of the appeal is whether Mr. Caldwell avoided the contract of sale and recovered his title to the car before the purported sale by Motobella Company Ltd. to G. & C. Finance Corpn. Ltd. on the 15th January, 1960. If Mr. Caldwell did not do so then, subject to the other contention which arises on the appeal, G. & C. Finance Corpn. Ltd. obtained a good title and were able to pass it on to the Car & Universal Finance Company Ltd. later in the same year.

The learned Master of the Rolls' decision that Mr. Caldwell had established a rescission on the 13th January, 1960, was strongly attacked before us on the ground that, though interesting, it was contrary to authority and was not supported by the various cases of election which the learned judge found comparable and where communication was, it was said, not required as an essential prerequisite - and reference was made in the judgment to termination of a lease for forfeiture and ratification, repudiation and affirmation of a contract.  Much of the argument before us was an endeavour to show that these illustrations and comparisons were either fallacious or ambiguous.  I do not pursue them for, with respect, I do not find them helpful to the decision, except possibly in the case of an affirmation of a contract which is an election to the contrary effect to a disaffirmation. An affirmation of a voidable contract may be established by any conduct which unequivocally manifests an intention to affirm it by the party who has the right to affirm or disaffirm.  Communication of an acceptance of a contract after knowledge of a fundamental breach of it by the other party or of fraud affecting it is, of course, evidence establishing affirmation but it is not essential evidence.  A party cannot reject goods sold and delivered if he uses them after knowledge of a right to reject and the judgment cites a case where an instruction to a broker to re-sell was sufficient affirmation of the contract in question even though that conduct was not communicated.  It may be said that a contract may be more readily approved and accepted than it can be terminated where a unilateral right to affirm or disaffirm arises.  The disaffirmation or election to avoid a contract changes the relationship of the parties and brings their respective obligations to an end whereas an affirmation leaves the contract effective though subject to a claim for damages for its breach.  Where a contracting party could be communicated with, and modern facilities make communication practically worldwide and almost immediate, it would be unlikely that a party could be held to have disaffirmed a contract unless he went so far as to communicate his decision so to do.  It would be what the other contracting party would normally require and unless communication were made the party's intention to rescind would not have been unequivocal, or clearly demonstrated or made manifest.  But in circumstances such as the present case the other contracting party, a fraudulent rogue who would know that the vendor would want his car back as soon as he knew of the fraud, would not expect to be communicated with as a matter of right or requirement and would deliberately, as here, do all he could to evade any such communication being made to him.  In such exceptional contractual circumstances, it does not seem to me appropriate to hold that a party so acting can claim any right to have a decision to rescind communicated to him before the contract is terminated.  To hold that he could would involve that the defrauding party if skilful enough to keep out of the way could deprive the other party to the contract of his right to rescind, a right to which he was entitled and which he would wish to exercise as the defrauding party would well know or at least confidently suspect.  The position has to be viewed, as I see it, between the two contracting parties involved in the particular contract in question.   That another innocent party or parties may suffer does not in my view of the matter justify imposing on a defrauded seller an impossible task.  He has to establish clearly and unequivocally that he terminates the con" tract and is no longer to be bound by it.  If he cannot communicate his decision he may still satisfy a judge or jury that he had made a final and irrevocable decision and ended the contract.

I am in agreement with the Master of the Rolls, who asked "And is a man in the position of Mr Caldwell ever to be able to rescind the contract when a fraudulent person absconds as Mr. Norris did here?" and answered that he can do so "if he at once, on discovering the fraud, takes all possible steps to regain the goods even though he cannot find the rogue nor communicate with him".

The appellants contended that in Scarf v. Jardine (7 Appeal Cases page 345) Lord Blackburn laid it down that election to avoid a contract is not completed until the decision has been communicated to the other side "in such a way as to lead the opposite party to believe that he has made that choice", and they relied on the many works of authority which state that where a right of election exists there has to be communication.  Scarf v. Jardine is a very different case from the present.  It is so well known and so often cited that it does not call for analysis.  In that case Lord Blackburn and, in the various works referred to, the authors had not in mind in enunciating a general principle the circumstances and the arguments which have arisen in the present case.

Even in the light of this statement of the law it was conceded - and rightly so - that if Mr. Caldwell could have found the car and had re-taken it without the knowledge of the buyer, but before resale to an innocent purchaser, the contract would have been at an end and the title restored to Mr. Caldwell.  Such an act would have been an unequivocal act of election to disaffirm the contract.

In the case of an innocent misrepresentation in circumstances which would permit the party misled to rescind, the other party would not deliberately avoid communication (for that would seem to negative innocence) and circumstances would be rare where communication could not be readily made in one way or another.  If communication was possible it is difficult to see how there could be rescission without communication and the inference would be that the contracting parties required communication of termination. Special circumstances may arise and call for future consideration but I do not think the appellants' comparison in argument between innocent and fraudulent misrepresentation invalidates the learned Master of the Rolls' judgment.

It has to be recognised that in transactions such as this where fraud intervenes, some innocent party may have to suffer and it may well be that legislation is overdue to do justice between the victims of fraud and to apportion in some way the loss.  But in the present case I can see nothing unjust in the loss falling on the G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd. (against whom the appellants can claim redress) who made the minimum enquiries, who bought a car which apparently they never saw and hired it out to a man of those existence and identity they did not know and who may well have been fictitious, rather than that the loss should fall on Mr. Caldwell who acted immediately and did all in his power to retract the transaction.

I would dismiss the appeal on this issue and that is sufficient to decide the appeal in the respondent's favour.

The learned Master of the Rolls took his judgment in favour of Mr Caldwell further and held that Motobella Company Ltd. were in the circumstances of this case the general agents of G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd. and that as Motobella admittedly had notice of the fraud and that as the defect in title known to the agents was fixed upon G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd. they did not acquire a good title to the car.  The judgment recognises that this issue of agency is difficult and I find, with respect, the decision on it too difficult to accept and to support.   That it would be desirable that a hire purchase company such as the G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd., either themselves or through an agent, should inquire into the title to a car in which they intend to deal I would not doubt.  Their sole reliance on the dealers (who are not always carefully selected) to warrant the title, and their apparent indifference to the condition or even the roadworthiness of a car - I have already mentioned even its existence as a vehicle - and their complete lack of knowledge of the existence or identity of the hirer, leaves open opportunity for fraud, with no real check or supervision.  In fact fraud within this gap in a finance company's knowledge is known in the courts to be so extensive that the practice does not seem to me to be sufficiently excused on the ground, sometimes set up, that speed and the exigencies of this class of business do not permit further investigation.  Reliance on a dealer's warranty has so often proved worthless.  But agency requires a mandate, express or implied.  The G. & C. Corporation Ltd.'s standard form of hiring which purported to hire the Jaguar car in question to Alfred Henry Knowles contains the clause, "I recognise that the supplier of the goods is not your agent and is not authorised to make any representations on your behalf", and in the seller's invoice contained in the same form the seller (in this case the Motobella Co. Ltd., who signed the document), states, "We certify that the statements in this invoice are true and that the goods which are correctly described and referred to in this invoice belong absolutely to us and that the goods are free from all lien and encumbrances".

The invoice is an offer to sell the car referred to in the hire purchase agreement and it expressly provides that it "shall be considered pro forma until notification of acceptance is received by us".  On acceptance, which was given by G. & C. Finance Corporation, Ltd., a contract of sale was concluded and the stipulation that the goods "belong absolutely to us" became part of the bargain.  It was a contractual term and as far as I can see there is no evidence that the dealers were employed to investigate the title on behalf of the buyers or that the buyers relied on anything other than the seller's warranty.

It would seem that the dealers, the Motobella Company, were on the books of the Finance Corporation and were "recognised dealers" with them and it would appear that they were from the very circumstances the agents of the Finance Corporation to hand over the car to the hirer after the Finance Corporation had become owners.  The Finance Corporation had to give possession of the car to the hirer and as they never saw the car or the hirer the dealer must have acted to this extent as their agent.

In this state of the facts I do not find sufficient evidence to establish a general agency or any agency which involved a duty on the dealers to make enquiries as to title on behalf of the Finance Corporation.  The dealers' contractual obligation in the sale was a different matter and in that they were clearly in breach.  I do not inquire what would have been the position if agency had been established.  It was argued before us that even in that event the agent's knowledge might not be imparted to the Finance Corporation.

The first ground of the learned Master of the Rolls' judgment is sufficient for the respondent's success on this interpleader issue and in my opinion the appeal should be dismissed. 

LORD UPJOHN (Judgment read by Lord Justice Davies):

On the 12th January, 1960, one Norris agreed to purchase a Jaguar motor car from the plaintiff Caldwell for the sum of £975. He took delivery of it on the same day giving in exchange £10 in cash and a cheque for £965.  Norris also left as security a Hillman motor car to which he had no title.

Norris was in fact a fraudulent rogue.  His cheque was worthless and he absconded with the car.  The police were already searching for him, for there was a warrant for his arrest in connection with some other transaction.  He could not be found.

Admittedly however he acquired a voidable title to the car when he took delivery.  On the 15th January, after passing through the hands of a company called Motobella Company Ltd., the Jaguar was sold to a person who was admittedly a bona fide purchaser for value.  The plaintiff realised that the cheque was worthless and that Norris was a fraudulent rogue on the morning of the 13th January.  He immediately did everything he reasonably could to trace the car and repossess it.  It was no good trying to search for or to communicate with Norris, for the police were already doing their best to apprehend him.

On the footing that on the 13th January the plaintiff did everything he reasonably could to avoid the contract of sale short of communicating his intention to do so to Norris, the whole question is whether such acts of avoidance were effective in law to avoid the contract on that day or whether communication to Norris of intention to avoid the contract was necessary in law.

Where one party to a contract has an option unilaterally to rescind or disaffirm it by reason of the fraud or misrepresentation of the other party, he must elect to do so within a reasonable time and cannot do so after he has done anything to affirm the contract with knowledge of the facts giving rise to the option to rescind. But in principle and on authority he must in my judgment in the ordinary course communicate his intention to rescind to the other party.  This must be so because the other party is entitled to treat the contractual nexus as continuing until he is made aware of the intention of the other to exercise his option to rescind.

So the intention must be communicated and an uncommunicated intention, for example by speaking to a third party or making a private note, will be ineffective.  The text books to which we were referred are unanimous on the subject, "If a party elects to rescind he must within a reasonable time manifest that election by communicating to the other party his intention to rescind the transaction and claim no interest under it.  The communication need not be formal provided it is a distinct and positive repudiation of the transaction": Kerr on Fraud and Mistake, 7th Edition, page 530.

See also Benjamin on Sale, 8th Edition, page 441; Pollock on Contracts, 13th Edition, page 467.

Mr. Caplan for the appellant of course also relies strongly on the well known words of Lord Blackburn in Scarf v. Jardine (7 Appeal Cases 345, starting at the foot of page 360), to the effect that in general an election must be communicated to the other side though that was not a case of contract.

Further, with all respect to the judgment of the Master of the Rolls, Lord Hatherley's observations in Reese River Silver Mining Co. v. Smith (Law Reports 4 House of Lords 64, at page 74) in my view support the same conclusion.

Such in my view must be the general principle.  Does it admit of any exception ?

Mr. Caplan concedes that there is one:  where the subject-matter of the contract is a transfer of property, then the party entitled to do so may disaffirm the contract by retaking possession of the property.  But Mr. Caplan submits this is really a method of communication, though for my part I do not see how that can be true of every case that could be suggested.

Is there any other exception?  Mr. Caplan submits not and that there should be a universal rule of law that communication is essential to break the nexus.  On the facts of this case it is clear that Norris intended quite deliberately to disappear and render it impossible for the plaintiff to communicate with him or to recover the car.  While I appreciate Mr. Caplan's argument that this point can only arise in cases between the vendor and a third party, I agree with Lord Justice Sellers that this problem must be solved by consideration of the rights between the two contracting parties.  Admittedly one of two innocent parties must suffer for the fraud of a third, but that cannot be helped and does not assist to solve the problem.  One thing is quite clear - that neither Lord Blackburn nor Lord Hatherley in the cases above mentioned nor the text-book writers had in mind circumstances remotely resembling these.  It is indeed strange that there is no authority in point.

If one party by absconding deliberately puts it out of the power of the other to communicate his intention to rescind which he knows the other will almost certainly want to do, I do not think he can any longer insist on his right to be made aware of the election to determine the contract.  In these circumstances communication is a useless formality.  I think that the law must allow the innocent party to exercise his right of rescission otherwise than by communication or repossession.  To hold otherwise would be to allow a fraudulent contracting party by his very fraud to prevent the innocent party from exercising his undoubted right.  I would hold that in circumstances such as these the innocent party may evince his intention to disaffirm the contract by overt means falling short of communication or repossession.

We heard much interesting discussion on the position where one party makes an innocent misrepresentation which entitles the other to elect to rescind and then innocently so acts that the other cannot find him to communicate his election to him.  I say nothing about that case and would leave it to be decided if and when it arises.  I am solely concerned with the fraudulent rogue who deliberately makes it impossible for the other to communicate with him or to retake the property. 

Mr. Caplan further argued that if in the circumstances of the case communication to Norris was not necessary, yet what the plaintiff did on the 13th January when the cheque was dishonoured did not amount to an unequivocal election to disaffirm; and it was further said that he could have done more to contact Norris.  On the facts of this case I do not see what more the plaintiff could reasonably have done nor how he could have made his position plainer.

We heard much argument on what were called the comparable cases: election; forfeiture of a lease; ratification of a contract; repudiation of a contract; affirmation of a contract.  I do not deal with them, for in my opinion they are not truly comparable. With regard to forfeiture of a lease we were referred to a number of authorities on the question whether it is the issue or service of the writ that constitutes the election to determine the lease. In some cases the distinction between the two was, on the facts, immaterial and in those cases judges have I think sometimes reasonably used "issue" of the writ as being synonymous with "issue and service" of the writ.  On principle, as at present advised, I prefer the view that the election to determine arises only on service of the writ; until then the plaintiff may change his mind and tear it up.

On this part of the appeal I therefore agree with the learned Master of the Rolls.

He went on to hold, however, that the purchasers of the Jaguar car on the 15th January, the G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd., must be fixed with notice of the fact that their vendor, Motobella Company Ltd., had only a defeasible title and so failed to establish their plea of a purchaser in good faith without notice of any defect of title.

The learned Master of the Rolls held that the G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd. were themselves innocent purchasers in good faith, but they were a hire purchase company accustomed to do business with Motobella, who were car dealers.  The Master of the Rolls held that Motobella were general agents of G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd. and that in particular "the dealers were agents of the finance company to see that the title was in order".  As it was conceded that Motobella had notice of the defect in title, it followed that the finance company were fixed with notice of the defect.

I regret I cannot agree with the judgment of the Master of the Rolls.  No doubt car dealers are agents for some purposes of the finance companies with whom they deal in relation to transactions with the hirer; but the basic transaction between car dealer and finance company is one of sale and purchase.

In the absence of some express term of the contract between them or some custom of the trade (which is not suggested) I am not prepared to hold that in these hire purchase transactions there is some special rule that the purchaser constitutes his vendor his agent to investigate title for him.  Caveat emptor is the rule.

It is I think against the realities of the case to imply or suggest any such term or rule.  The finance company truly relies on the car dealer to sell it a car without a defective title; but this is as a matter of commercial good faith not because it relies on the dealer to make an investigation of title on the finance company's behalf.  In fact on the evidence the G. & C. Finance Corporation did itself make some very limited investigation into title.  In truth the finance company knows perfectly well that occasionally the dealer will sell it a car with a defective title not because of any dishonesty on the part of the dealer but because there are some dishonest persons operating in the second-hand motor market.  The finance company also probably knows that some of the dealers with whom it may do business may be or become dishonest.  The finance company protects itself from these frauds, by and large, by adjusting its charges to hirers.

Furthermore, the finance company usually does, and in this case did, protect itself by obtaining an express warranty from, the dealers "that the goods which are correctly described and referred to in this invoice belong absolutely to me/us". So that if the dealers do sell a car with a defective title to the finance company the latter will have its common law remedy in damages against the dealer.

That is the simple commercial way in which finance companies protect themselves and it seems to me that such an express covenant must negative any implication that the dealer is an agent to investigate title.

However, for the reasons given earlier, I would dismiss this appeal. 

LORD JUSTICE DAVIES:  I agree.

It is, indeed, curious that the point at issue in the present case appears to be free from any direct authority and not to have been considered in any of the text books.

Norris obtains the car from Caldwell under a contract procured by the fraud or false pretences of Norris.  Caldwell has thus the right as against Norris upon ascertaining the true facts to rescind the contract.  If by his conduct Norris makes it impossible for Caldwell either to communicate to Norris his decision to rescind or to retake the car, how, if at all, can Caldwell exercise his right to rescind?

The contention for the appellants is that the party entitled to rescind can exercise that right only by communicating his decision to the other party by words or conduct or alternatively, where the title to the goods is in question, by actually retaking possession of the goods; and that, therefore, in the present case, as Caldwell did neither of these things before the 15th January, when the car was transferred to the G. & C. Finance Corporation, Ltd., the latter, having bought in good faith and without notice of any defect in the title, acquired a good title to the car.

Mr. Finer for the respondent agrees that an election or decision to rescind, in order to be effective, must be exercised unequivocally, or, to use the phrase of Lord Hatherley, Lord Chancellor, in Reese River Silver Mining Co. v. Smith (1869), Law Reports 4 House of Lords 64, at page 74, "in the plainest and most open manner competent".  He agrees also that in the overwhelming number of cases communication to the other party would probably be essential.  But, he submits, the question whether the election to rescind has been validly exercised is always one of fact (Longman v. Hill (1891), 7 Times Law Reports page 639); and the essential question always is whether the party having the right to rescind did all that was in his power in the circumstances to make his decision unequivocally known.

In my judgment, the admission by the appellants that recaption is an exception to the allegedly universal necessity for communication is important.  Curiously enough, though both Mr. Capler and Mr. Finer agreed that recaption without communication is a sufficient act of rescission, no very clear authority was cited to that effect, except possibly the decision of Mr. Justice Bigham in In re Eastgate, (1905 1 King's Bench page 465).  It is true that recaption is a plain act of resumption of dominion over the goods.

But if the fact of the recaption is unknown to the other party, there is obviously no communication to him.  We were much pressed by Mr. Caplan on another part of his argument with the case of an innocent misrepresentation.  But it is to be observed that a person who has obtained goods by an innocent misrepresentation might well in all innocence purport to transfer the goods to a third party at a time after the goods had without the representor's knowledge been retaken by the representee, so that the purported transfer would be invalid.

On the facts of this case Norris must be taken to have known that Caldwell might on ascertaining the fraud wish to rescind the contract.  Norris disappeared, and so did the car.  Caldwell could therefore neither communicate with Norris nor retake the car. It must, therefore, I think, be taken to be implied in the transaction between Norris and Caldwell that in the event of Caldwell wishing to rescind he should be entitled to do so by the best of the means possible.  Lex non cogit ad impossibilia.  It is true that it was conceivably possible that Caldwell might decide not to rescind and to sue on the cheque instead; but it is most doubtful whether on the facts of this case such a possibility could have occurred to Norris as a real one.

The fact that Norris knew that he was a rogue and that there fore Caldwell was likely to be after him distinguishes this case from that of an innocent misrepresentor.  It would not occur to the latter that the other party to the contract would have any right or desire to rescind, so that there would be no such implication as that which I have suggested arose in the present case.

It was argued that Caldwell's action in going to the police and the Automobile Association was not an unequivocal act, since I was open to him to have changed his mind on the next day if, to us Mr. Caplan's phrase, Norris had suddenly won a football pool and so have become a worthwhile defendant to an action on the cheque. That again, in my opinion, is an unrealistic view of the facts. Caldwell was, as I think, declaring to the world "I have been swindled and I want my car back".  He was declaring his intention as clearly as if he had seen the car in the street and seized it.

In the result, therefore, I agree with the judgment of the learned Master of the Rolls on this ground.  But, like my Lords, I do not think that the analogies which the Master of the Rolls drew in support of his judgment were helpful or, with respect, wholly accurate.

The learned Master of the Rolls also put his judgment upon an alternative ground, namely, that Motobella, the dealers, were the agents of G. & C. to enquire into the title to the car, and that, as Motobella had notice of a defect in the title, G. &C. were fixed with that knowledge.  With the greatest respect, I do not think that this can be right.  It may be that in some hire purchase transactions, whatever the documents may say, a motor dealer is for some purposes the agent of the hire purchase company, for example to produce, and procure signatures to, the hire purchase contract.  Lord Denning himself expressed this view in Financings v. Stimson (1962 1 Weekly Law Reports page 1184), though those observations must obviously be read subject to the views expressed in Campbell Discount v. Gall (1961 1 Queen's Bench page 431), which was not cited to the Master of the Rolls in the present case.  But whatever be the dealer's position vis-a-vis the hire purchase company as to the making of the hire purchase agreement, the present case is entirely different.  We are concerned here with a sale of a car by the dealer to the hire purchase company.  In that transaction the dealer gives a warranty as to title, always implied and frequently, as here, express.  But he is dealing at arm's-length with the hire purchase company.  It is a contradiction in terms to speak of the seller being an agent of the buyer.  Moreover the conception of agency, as I understand it, presupposes the existence of three parties, namely the principal, the agent, and the third party between whom and the principal the agent creates relations.  In the sale of the car by the dealer to the hire purchase company there was no third party involved.

I should, therefore, not be prepared to uphold the decision of the learned Master of the Rolls that the dealers in this case were the agents of the hire purchase company to enquire into the title to the car or that the latter were fixed with notice which the former had as to any defect of title. 

MR FINER:  Then the appeal will be dismissed, my Lords; and I ask for the costs of the appeal? 

LORD JUSTICE SELLERS:  So be it.
]
[

LORD JUSTICE SELLERS:  This appeal raises a primary point in the law of contract.  The question has arisen whether a contract which is voidable by one party can in any circumstances be terminated by that party without his rescission being communicated to the other party.

Lord Denning, Master of the Rolls, from whom this appeal comes from a trial in the Queen's Bench, has held in the circumstances of this case that there can be rescission without communication where the seller of a motor car who admittedly had the right to rescind the contract of sale on the ground of fraudulent misrepresentation terminated the contract by an unequivocal act of election which demonstrated clearly that he had elected to rescind it and to be no longer bound by it.

The general rule, no doubt, is that where a party is entitled to rescind a contract and wishes to do so the contract subsists until the opposing party is informed that the contract has been terminated.  The difficulty of the seller in this case was that, when he learnt of the fraud and therefore ascertained his right to terminate the bargain, he could not without considerable delay find either the fraudulent buyer or the car which had been sold.  Such circumstances would not appear to be so rare in transactions in motor cars (or horses in earlier days) that they would not, it might be thought, have given rise to litigation and an authoritative decision, but it seems that over the years the point in issue has not been decided in any reported case in similar or comparable circumstances.

The case was heard on an agreed statement of facts and of issues arising out of a sheriff's interpleader, and some oral evidence was called.  Briefly, Mr. Caldwell, the defendant in this interpleader, owned a Jaguar motor car which was obtained from him by one Norris, who took the car away from the defendant's house on Tuesday evening, the 12th January, 1960, having induced the owner to sell it for £975, of which £l0 in cash had been paid as a deposit two days before and for which a cheque for £965 was handed over.  As soon as the bank in Brighton on which the cheque was drawn opened at 10 a.m. on the 13th January, Mr. Caldwell discovered that the cheque was worthless and that he had been deceived and defrauded.  The car had been obtained by false pretences.  A Hillman car was also left as security but the buyer had no title in it to transfer to Mr. Caldwell and it too was worthless to him.  It was agreed that Norris acquired a voidable title to the car.  Some time on the 13th January Norris sold and delivered the Jaguar to Motobella Company, Limited, and it was further agreed that Motobella had notice of the defect in title and took the vehicle with no better title than that previously vested in Norris.  On the 15th January Motobella Company Ltd., sold the car to G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd., who purported to hire it to one Alfred Harry Knowles, who would appear to have been a fictitious hirer.  On the 13th August, 1960, the car was sold to the plaintiffs on this interpleader issue, Car & Universal Finance Company, Ltd., another company dealing in hire purchase finance.  Mr. Caldwell's present claim to the car is based on what he did on the 13th January, 1960, which it is alleged terminated the contract of sale of the previous evening and restored the title in the car to him.

This is what he did.  As soon as he learnt from the bank manager that the cheque in payment for the car could not be met and that there had been a similar transaction previously and that the police were looking for Norris, Mr. Caldwell went at once to the police.  The police produced a photograph of Norris, whom Mr. Caldwell identified as the man to whom he had sold his car.  A warrant was out for the arrest of this man in the name of Rowley. His house had been watched and endeavours had been made to find him. Through the police and the organisation of the Automobile Association Mr. Caldwell made every endeavour to find and recover the car forthwith and to discover the absconding and elusive Norris.  Mr. Caldwell clearly wished to terminate the contract of sale and take back the car and acted as far as he could to that end.

The Jaguar was found on the 20th January when it was being driven by a director of Motobella Company, Ltd., who had purported to sell it to the G. & C. Finance Corporation on the 15th January for hire to one Knowles.  He claimed that his company had bought it and it was their property, but the claim was not persisted in when the matter came to trial.  The Motobella Company Ltd. were sued by Mr. Caldwell for the return of the car and when the action was called on it was not defended and Mr. Caldwell obtained judgment. When he sought to take the car under the judgment the present plaintiffs on the interpleader issue claimed it as theirs.  They had the car transferred to them on the 13th August, 1960, and thereafter they seem to have hired it out.

By reason of the transaction completed on the 12th January, 1960, Norris, otherwise Rowley, obtained the property in the car in question.  Another man was with Norris, but as he was apparently the servant or agent of Norris no question arises with regard to him.

The sole question on this part of the appeal is whether Mr. Caldwell avoided the contract of sale and recovered his title to the car before the purported sale by Motobella Company Ltd. to G. & C. Finance Corpn. Ltd. on the 15th January, 1960. If Mr. Caldwell did not do so then, subject to the other contention which arises on the appeal, G. & C. Finance Corpn. Ltd. obtained a good title and were able to pass it on to the Car & Universal Finance Company Ltd. later in the same year.

The learned Master of the Rolls' decision that Mr. Caldwell had established a rescission on the 13th January, 1960, was strongly attacked before us on the ground that, though interesting, it was contrary to authority and was not supported by the various cases of election which the learned judge found comparable and where communication was, it was said, not required as an essential prerequisite - and reference was made in the judgment to termination of a lease for forfeiture and ratification, repudiation and affirmation of a contract.  Much of the argument before us was an endeavour to show that these illustrations and comparisons were either fallacious or ambiguous.  I do not pursue them for, with respect, I do not find them helpful to the decision, except possibly in the case of an affirmation of a contract which is an election to the contrary effect to a disaffirmation. An affirmation of a voidable contract may be established by any conduct which unequivocally manifests an intention to affirm it by the party who has the right to affirm or disaffirm.  Communication of an acceptance of a contract after knowledge of a fundamental breach of it by the other party or of fraud affecting it is, of course, evidence establishing affirmation but it is not essential evidence.  A party cannot reject goods sold and delivered if he uses them after knowledge of a right to reject and the judgment cites a case where an instruction to a broker to re-sell was sufficient affirmation of the contract in question even though that conduct was not communicated.  It may be said that a contract may be more readily approved and accepted than it can be terminated where a unilateral right to affirm or disaffirm arises.  The disaffirmation or election to avoid a contract changes the relationship of the parties and brings their respective obligations to an end whereas an affirmation leaves the contract effective though subject to a claim for damages for its breach.  Where a contracting party could be communicated with, and modern facilities make communication practically worldwide and almost immediate, it would be unlikely that a party could be held to have disaffirmed a contract unless he went so far as to communicate his decision so to do.  It would be what the other contracting party would normally require and unless communication were made the party's intention to rescind would not have been unequivocal, or clearly demonstrated or made manifest.  But in circumstances such as the present case the other contracting party, a fraudulent rogue who would know that the vendor would want his car back as soon as he knew of the fraud, would not expect to be communicated with as a matter of right or requirement and would deliberately, as here, do all he could to evade any such communication being made to him.  In such exceptional contractual circumstances, it does not seem to me appropriate to hold that a party so acting can claim any right to have a decision to rescind communicated to him before the contract is terminated.  To hold that he could would involve that the defrauding party if skilful enough to keep out of the way could deprive the other party to the contract of his right to rescind, a right to which he was entitled and which he would wish to exercise as the defrauding party would well know or at least confidently suspect.  The position has to be viewed, as I see it, between the two contracting parties involved in the particular contract in question.   That another innocent party or parties may suffer does not in my view of the matter justify imposing on a defrauded seller an impossible task.  He has to establish clearly and unequivocally that he terminates the con" tract and is no longer to be bound by it.  If he cannot communicate his decision he may still satisfy a judge or jury that he had made a final and irrevocable decision and ended the contract.

I am in agreement with the Master of the Rolls, who asked "And is a man in the position of Mr Caldwell ever to be able to rescind the contract when a fraudulent person absconds as Mr. Norris did here?" and answered that he can do so "if he at once, on discovering the fraud, takes all possible steps to regain the goods even though he cannot find the rogue nor communicate with him".

The appellants contended that in Scarf v. Jardine (7 Appeal Cases page 345) Lord Blackburn laid it down that election to avoid a contract is not completed until the decision has been communicated to the other side "in such a way as to lead the opposite party to believe that he has made that choice", and they relied on the many works of authority which state that where a right of election exists there has to be communication.  Scarf v. Jardine is a very different case from the present.  It is so well known and so often cited that it does not call for analysis.  In that case Lord Blackburn and, in the various works referred to, the authors had not in mind in enunciating a general principle the circumstances and the arguments which have arisen in the present case.

Even in the light of this statement of the law it was conceded - and rightly so - that if Mr. Caldwell could have found the car and had re-taken it without the knowledge of the buyer, but before resale to an innocent purchaser, the contract would have been at an end and the title restored to Mr. Caldwell.  Such an act would have been an unequivocal act of election to disaffirm the contract.

In the case of an innocent misrepresentation in circumstances which would permit the party misled to rescind, the other party would not deliberately avoid communication (for that would seem to negative innocence) and circumstances would be rare where communication could not be readily made in one way or another.  If communication was possible it is difficult to see how there could be rescission without communication and the inference would be that the contracting parties required communication of termination. Special circumstances may arise and call for future consideration but I do not think the appellants' comparison in argument between innocent and fraudulent misrepresentation invalidates the learned Master of the Rolls' judgment.

It has to be recognised that in transactions such as this where fraud intervenes, some innocent party may have to suffer and it may well be that legislation is overdue to do justice between the victims of fraud and to apportion in some way the loss.  But in the present case I can see nothing unjust in the loss falling on the G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd. (against whom the appellants can claim redress) who made the minimum enquiries, who bought a car which apparently they never saw and hired it out to a man of those existence and identity they did not know and who may well have been fictitious, rather than that the loss should fall on Mr. Caldwell who acted immediately and did all in his power to retract the transaction.

I would dismiss the appeal on this issue and that is sufficient to decide the appeal in the respondent's favour.

The learned Master of the Rolls took his judgment in favour of Mr Caldwell further and held that Motobella Company Ltd. were in the circumstances of this case the general agents of G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd. and that as Motobella admittedly had notice of the fraud and that as the defect in title known to the agents was fixed upon G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd. they did not acquire a good title to the car.  The judgment recognises that this issue of agency is difficult and I find, with respect, the decision on it too difficult to accept and to support.   That it would be desirable that a hire purchase company such as the G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd., either themselves or through an agent, should inquire into the title to a car in which they intend to deal I would not doubt.  Their sole reliance on the dealers (who are not always carefully selected) to warrant the title, and their apparent indifference to the condition or even the roadworthiness of a car - I have already mentioned even its existence as a vehicle - and their complete lack of knowledge of the existence or identity of the hirer, leaves open opportunity for fraud, with no real check or supervision.  In fact fraud within this gap in a finance company's knowledge is known in the courts to be so extensive that the practice does not seem to me to be sufficiently excused on the ground, sometimes set up, that speed and the exigencies of this class of business do not permit further investigation.  Reliance on a dealer's warranty has so often proved worthless.  But agency requires a mandate, express or implied.  The G. & C. Corporation Ltd.'s standard form of hiring which purported to hire the Jaguar car in question to Alfred Henry Knowles contains the clause, "I recognise that the supplier of the goods is not your agent and is not authorised to make any representations on your behalf", and in the seller's invoice contained in the same form the seller (in this case the Motobella Co. Ltd., who signed the document), states, "We certify that the statements in this invoice are true and that the goods which are correctly described and referred to in this invoice belong absolutely to us and that the goods are free from all lien and encumbrances".

The invoice is an offer to sell the car referred to in the hire purchase agreement and it expressly provides that it "shall be considered pro forma until notification of acceptance is received by us".  On acceptance, which was given by G. & C. Finance Corporation, Ltd., a contract of sale was concluded and the stipulation that the goods "belong absolutely to us" became part of the bargain.  It was a contractual term and as far as I can see there is no evidence that the dealers were employed to investigate the title on behalf of the buyers or that the buyers relied on anything other than the seller's warranty.

It would seem that the dealers, the Motobella Company, were on the books of the Finance Corporation and were "recognised dealers" with them and it would appear that they were from the very circumstances the agents of the Finance Corporation to hand over the car to the hirer after the Finance Corporation had become owners.  The Finance Corporation had to give possession of the car to the hirer and as they never saw the car or the hirer the dealer must have acted to this extent as their agent.

In this state of the facts I do not find sufficient evidence to establish a general agency or any agency which involved a duty on the dealers to make enquiries as to title on behalf of the Finance Corporation.  The dealers' contractual obligation in the sale was a different matter and in that they were clearly in breach.  I do not inquire what would have been the position if agency had been established.  It was argued before us that even in that event the agent's knowledge might not be imparted to the Finance Corporation.

The first ground of the learned Master of the Rolls' judgment is sufficient for the respondent's success on this interpleader issue and in my opinion the appeal should be dismissed. 

LORD UPJOHN (Judgment read by Lord Justice Davies):

On the 12th January, 1960, one Norris agreed to purchase a Jaguar motor car from the plaintiff Caldwell for the sum of £975. He took delivery of it on the same day giving in exchange £10 in cash and a cheque for £965.  Norris also left as security a Hillman motor car to which he had no title.

Norris was in fact a fraudulent rogue.  His cheque was worthless and he absconded with the car.  The police were already searching for him, for there was a warrant for his arrest in connection with some other transaction.  He could not be found.

Admittedly however he acquired a voidable title to the car when he took delivery.  On the 15th January, after passing through the hands of a company called Motobella Company Ltd., the Jaguar was sold to a person who was admittedly a bona fide purchaser for value.  The plaintiff realised that the cheque was worthless and that Norris was a fraudulent rogue on the morning of the 13th January.  He immediately did everything he reasonably could to trace the car and repossess it.  It was no good trying to search for or to communicate with Norris, for the police were already doing their best to apprehend him.

On the footing that on the 13th January the plaintiff did everything he reasonably could to avoid the contract of sale short of communicating his intention to do so to Norris, the whole question is whether such acts of avoidance were effective in law to avoid the contract on that day or whether communication to Norris of intention to avoid the contract was necessary in law.

Where one party to a contract has an option unilaterally to rescind or disaffirm it by reason of the fraud or misrepresentation of the other party, he must elect to do so within a reasonable time and cannot do so after he has done anything to affirm the contract with knowledge of the facts giving rise to the option to rescind. But in principle and on authority he must in my judgment in the ordinary course communicate his intention to rescind to the other party.  This must be so because the other party is entitled to treat the contractual nexus as continuing until he is made aware of the intention of the other to exercise his option to rescind.

So the intention must be communicated and an uncommunicated intention, for example by speaking to a third party or making a private note, will be ineffective.  The text books to which we were referred are unanimous on the subject, "If a party elects to rescind he must within a reasonable time manifest that election by communicating to the other party his intention to rescind the transaction and claim no interest under it.  The communication need not be formal provided it is a distinct and positive repudiation of the transaction": Kerr on Fraud and Mistake, 7th Edition, page 530.

See also Benjamin on Sale, 8th Edition, page 441; Pollock on Contracts, 13th Edition, page 467.

Mr. Caplan for the appellant of course also relies strongly on the well known words of Lord Blackburn in Scarf v. Jardine (7 Appeal Cases 345, starting at the foot of page 360), to the effect that in general an election must be communicated to the other side though that was not a case of contract.

Further, with all respect to the judgment of the Master of the Rolls, Lord Hatherley's observations in Reese River Silver Mining Co. v. Smith (Law Reports 4 House of Lords 64, at page 74) in my view support the same conclusion.

Such in my view must be the general principle.  Does it admit of any exception ?

Mr. Caplan concedes that there is one:  where the subject-matter of the contract is a transfer of property, then the party entitled to do so may disaffirm the contract by retaking possession of the property.  But Mr. Caplan submits this is really a method of communication, though for my part I do not see how that can be true of every case that could be suggested.

Is there any other exception?  Mr. Caplan submits not and that there should be a universal rule of law that communication is essential to break the nexus.  On the facts of this case it is clear that Norris intended quite deliberately to disappear and render it impossible for the plaintiff to communicate with him or to recover the car.  While I appreciate Mr. Caplan's argument that this point can only arise in cases between the vendor and a third party, I agree with Lord Justice Sellers that this problem must be solved by consideration of the rights between the two contracting parties.  Admittedly one of two innocent parties must suffer for the fraud of a third, but that cannot be helped and does not assist to solve the problem.  One thing is quite clear - that neither Lord Blackburn nor Lord Hatherley in the cases above mentioned nor the text-book writers had in mind circumstances remotely resembling these.  It is indeed strange that there is no authority in point.

If one party by absconding deliberately puts it out of the power of the other to communicate his intention to rescind which he knows the other will almost certainly want to do, I do not think he can any longer insist on his right to be made aware of the election to determine the contract.  In these circumstances communication is a useless formality.  I think that the law must allow the innocent party to exercise his right of rescission otherwise than by communication or repossession.  To hold otherwise would be to allow a fraudulent contracting party by his very fraud to prevent the innocent party from exercising his undoubted right.  I would hold that in circumstances such as these the innocent party may evince his intention to disaffirm the contract by overt means falling short of communication or repossession.

We heard much interesting discussion on the position where one party makes an innocent misrepresentation which entitles the other to elect to rescind and then innocently so acts that the other cannot find him to communicate his election to him.  I say nothing about that case and would leave it to be decided if and when it arises.  I am solely concerned with the fraudulent rogue who deliberately makes it impossible for the other to communicate with him or to retake the property. 

Mr. Caplan further argued that if in the circumstances of the case communication to Norris was not necessary, yet what the plaintiff did on the 13th January when the cheque was dishonoured did not amount to an unequivocal election to disaffirm; and it was further said that he could have done more to contact Norris.  On the facts of this case I do not see what more the plaintiff could reasonably have done nor how he could have made his position plainer.

We heard much argument on what were called the comparable cases: election; forfeiture of a lease; ratification of a contract; repudiation of a contract; affirmation of a contract.  I do not deal with them, for in my opinion they are not truly comparable. With regard to forfeiture of a lease we were referred to a number of authorities on the question whether it is the issue or service of the writ that constitutes the election to determine the lease. In some cases the distinction between the two was, on the facts, immaterial and in those cases judges have I think sometimes reasonably used "issue" of the writ as being synonymous with "issue and service" of the writ.  On principle, as at present advised, I prefer the view that the election to determine arises only on service of the writ; until then the plaintiff may change his mind and tear it up.

On this part of the appeal I therefore agree with the learned Master of the Rolls.

He went on to hold, however, that the purchasers of the Jaguar car on the 15th January, the G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd., must be fixed with notice of the fact that their vendor, Motobella Company Ltd., had only a defeasible title and so failed to establish their plea of a purchaser in good faith without notice of any defect of title.

The learned Master of the Rolls held that the G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd. were themselves innocent purchasers in good faith, but they were a hire purchase company accustomed to do business with Motobella, who were car dealers.  The Master of the Rolls held that Motobella were general agents of G. & C. Finance Corporation Ltd. and that in particular "the dealers were agents of the finance company to see that the title was in order".  As it was conceded that Motobella had notice of the defect in title, it followed that the finance company were fixed with notice of the defect.

I regret I cannot agree with the judgment of the Master of the Rolls.  No doubt car dealers are agents for some purposes of the finance companies with whom they deal in relation to transactions with the hirer; but the basic transaction between car dealer and finance company is one of sale and purchase.

In the absence of some express term of the contract between them or some custom of the trade (which is not suggested) I am not prepared to hold that in these hire purchase transactions there is some special rule that the purchaser constitutes his vendor his agent to investigate title for him.  Caveat emptor is the rule.

It is I think against the realities of the case to imply or suggest any such term or rule.  The finance company truly relies on the car dealer to sell it a car without a defective title; but this is as a matter of commercial good faith not because it relies on the dealer to make an investigation of title on the finance company's behalf.  In fact on the evidence the G. & C. Finance Corporation did itself make some very limited investigation into title.  In truth the finance company knows perfectly well that occasionally the dealer will sell it a car with a defective title not because of any dishonesty on the part of the dealer but because there are some dishonest persons operating in the second-hand motor market.  The finance company also probably knows that some of the dealers with whom it may do business may be or become dishonest.  The finance company protects itself from these frauds, by and large, by adjusting its charges to hirers.

Furthermore, the finance company usually does, and in this case did, protect itself by obtaining an express warranty from, the dealers "that the goods which are correctly described and referred to in this invoice belong absolutely to me/us". So that if the dealers do sell a car with a defective title to the finance company the latter will have its common law remedy in damages against the dealer.

That is the simple commercial way in which finance companies protect themselves and it seems to me that such an express covenant must negative any implication that the dealer is an agent to investigate title.

However, for the reasons given earlier, I would dismiss this appeal. 

LORD JUSTICE DAVIES:  I agree.

It is, indeed, curious that the point at issue in the present case appears to be free from any direct authority and not to have been considered in any of the text books.

Norris obtains the car from Caldwell under a contract procured by the fraud or false pretences of Norris.  Caldwell has thus the right as against Norris upon ascertaining the true facts to rescind the contract.  If by his conduct Norris makes it impossible for Caldwell either to communicate to Norris his decision to rescind or to retake the car, how, if at all, can Caldwell exercise his right to rescind?

The contention for the appellants is that the party entitled to rescind can exercise that right only by communicating his decision to the other party by words or conduct or alternatively, where the title to the goods is in question, by actually retaking possession of the goods; and that, therefore, in the present case, as Caldwell did neither of these things before the 15th January, when the car was transferred to the G. & C. Finance Corporation, Ltd., the latter, having bought in good faith and without notice of any defect in the title, acquired a good title to the car.

Mr. Finer for the respondent agrees that an election or decision to rescind, in order to be effective, must be exercised unequivocally, or, to use the phrase of Lord Hatherley, Lord Chancellor, in Reese River Silver Mining Co. v. Smith (1869), Law Reports 4 House of Lords 64, at page 74, "in the plainest and most open manner competent".  He agrees also that in the overwhelming number of cases communication to the other party would probably be essential.  But, he submits, the question whether the election to rescind has been validly exercised is always one of fact (Longman v. Hill (1891), 7 Times Law Reports page 639); and the essential question always is whether the party having the right to rescind did all that was in his power in the circumstances to make his decision unequivocally known.

In my judgment, the admission by the appellants that recaption is an exception to the allegedly universal necessity for communication is important.  Curiously enough, though both Mr. Capler and Mr. Finer agreed that recaption without communication is a sufficient act of rescission, no very clear authority was cited to that effect, except possibly the decision of Mr. Justice Bigham in In re Eastgate, (1905 1 King's Bench page 465).  It is true that recaption is a plain act of resumption of dominion over the goods.

But if the fact of the recaption is unknown to the other party, there is obviously no communication to him.  We were much pressed by Mr. Caplan on another part of his argument with the case of an innocent misrepresentation.  But it is to be observed that a person who has obtained goods by an innocent misrepresentation might well in all innocence purport to transfer the goods to a third party at a time after the goods had without the representor's knowledge been retaken by the representee, so that the purported transfer would be invalid.

On the facts of this case Norris must be taken to have known that Caldwell might on ascertaining the fraud wish to rescind the contract.  Norris disappeared, and so did the car.  Caldwell could therefore neither communicate with Norris nor retake the car. It must, therefore, I think, be taken to be implied in the transaction between Norris and Caldwell that in the event of Caldwell wishing to rescind he should be entitled to do so by the best of the means possible.  Lex non cogit ad impossibilia.  It is true that it was conceivably possible that Caldwell might decide not to rescind and to sue on the cheque instead; but it is most doubtful whether on the facts of this case such a possibility could have occurred to Norris as a real one.

The fact that Norris knew that he was a rogue and that there fore Caldwell was likely to be after him distinguishes this case from that of an innocent misrepresentor.  It would not occur to the latter that the other party to the contract would have any right or desire to rescind, so that there would be no such implication as that which I have suggested arose in the present case.

It was argued that Caldwell's action in going to the police and the Automobile Association was not an unequivocal act, since I was open to him to have changed his mind on the next day if, to us Mr. Caplan's phrase, Norris had suddenly won a football pool and so have become a worthwhile defendant to an action on the cheque. That again, in my opinion, is an unrealistic view of the facts. Caldwell was, as I think, declaring to the world "I have been swindled and I want my car back".  He was declaring his intention as clearly as if he had seen the car in the street and seized it.

In the result, therefore, I agree with the judgment of the learned Master of the Rolls on this ground.  But, like my Lords, I do not think that the analogies which the Master of the Rolls drew in support of his judgment were helpful or, with respect, wholly accurate.

The learned Master of the Rolls also put his judgment upon an alternative ground, namely, that Motobella, the dealers, were the agents of G. & C. to enquire into the title to the car, and that, as Motobella had notice of a defect in the title, G. &C. were fixed with that knowledge.  With the greatest respect, I do not think that this can be right.  It may be that in some hire purchase transactions, whatever the documents may say, a motor dealer is for some purposes the agent of the hire purchase company, for example to produce, and procure signatures to, the hire purchase contract.  Lord Denning himself expressed this view in Financings v. Stimson (1962 1 Weekly Law Reports page 1184), though those observations must obviously be read subject to the views expressed in Campbell Discount v. Gall (1961 1 Queen's Bench page 431), which was not cited to the Master of the Rolls in the present case.  But whatever be the dealer's position vis-a-vis the hire purchase company as to the making of the hire purchase agreement, the present case is entirely different.  We are concerned here with a sale of a car by the dealer to the hire purchase company.  In that transaction the dealer gives a warranty as to title, always implied and frequently, as here, express.  But he is dealing at arm's-length with the hire purchase company.  It is a contradiction in terms to speak of the seller being an agent of the buyer.  Moreover the conception of agency, as I understand it, presupposes the existence of three parties, namely the principal, the agent, and the third party between whom and the principal the agent creates relations.  In the sale of the car by the dealer to the hire purchase company there was no third party involved.

I should, therefore, not be prepared to uphold the decision of the learned Master of the Rolls that the dealers in this case were the agents of the hire purchase company to enquire into the title to the car or that the latter were fixed with notice which the former had as to any defect of title. 

MR FINER:  Then the appeal will be dismissed, my Lords; and I ask for the costs of the appeal? 

LORD JUSTICE SELLERS:  So be it.
]
